come from a part of the world where ethnic and religious minorities must navigate extremist elements, geopolitical instability, and limited resources. We know about uncertainty, survival, and fear. I’ve seen many of my own friends base decisions on fear; I’ve seen communities torn apart by it. I’ve seen fear creep into different crevices of peoples’ lives and politics. Fear thrives in the absence of mutual understanding and diversity, and it is a poisonous weapon. But there is an antidote: compassion. Compassion combats fear.

In my religion, we believe in karma. Many people misunderstand the concept of karma. Karma is not a pre-determined destiny. Karma does not mean we accept injustice or inequality. Karma just means cause and effect. Karma means we are empowered to be part of the solution. Karma gives us a method to combat fear, terror, injustice, and inequality. Karma means that we are not defined by our situation but rather by the choices we make. 

As a believer in karma, I encourage the world to choose courage and compassion. Far too often we wait for leaders and governments to bring us peace. But think about it: it is individuals who build peace. And when individuals build peace, it is strong, it is lasting, and it is genuine. That does not mean that we sit nicely on a meditation cushion and enjoy our own inner peace. Peace requires action. Peace requires a real sense of urgency. Peace requires courage and hard work. Peace means that each and every one of us has an obligation to build mutual understanding and an obligation to reject fear. Peace requires us to not only accept but to celebrate the differences among us. Fear needs us to reject differences. Peace encourages us to embrace differences.

Related: Facing Fear 

The nuns of my lineage, often known as the Kung Fu Nuns, are great examples of that courage. In my part of the world, nuns are not afforded much opportunity for education or leadership. However, the nuns of the Drukpa Order take on real leadership roles and responsibilities within our community. They learn to work with each other even though they come from different countries and speak different languages. The nuns are learning Kung Fu as a means to instill physical and mental confidence, breaking centuries of tradition. After the Nepal earthquakes of 2015, for example, the Kung Fu Nuns delivered medical and relief supplies to some of the hardest hit regions. They traversed mountainsides and river-rafted to help Nepalis of all religions and backgrounds. They rejected fear and chose courage instead.

Related: Kung Fu Nuns Planning to Teach Hundreds of Himalayan Women Self Defense 

In light of all the violence in the world, the Kung Fu Nuns and I have embarked upon a bicycle journey from Kathmandu to Kashmir to celebrate diversity and build mutual understanding. In Ladakh, where many of my nuns come from, there is a long history of diversity. Located along the Silk Route, the people of this community celebrated different religions, languages, ethnicities, and traditions. They know that these differences do not fracture us. Diversity strengthens us. Diversity is not something to be tolerated—it is to be celebrated. We should welcome it with curiosity, delight, and joy. This is what fear fears. While cycling is a small gesture, I hope we serve as an example of how women, religious leaders, and individuals from all communities have a role in peace building. You also have a role in peace building. Some of you have a large platform and can speak out for others who are not heard. Some of you are not in public service, but may make a big difference in your work place, in school, or at home. Every one of us can create an immediate impact and can build peace.
$$$
ps://flic.kr/p/HS3pb4
Every mother has a birth story. The classic myth of the birth of the Buddha—or rather, of the child named Siddhartha who would grow up to become the Buddha—goes like this:

There was a beautiful woman named Maya who was the wife of King Suddhodana, the ruler of the Shakya clan of Kapilavastu in a region that now straddles the border between India and Nepal. Maya and King Suddhodana had been married for twenty years without having children. But one night the queen dreamed that a white elephant—a symbol of greatness in ancient India—appeared, circled around her three times, and entered her womb through her right side.

Queen Maya carried her baby inside her for ten lunar months, and then—as was the custom—set out to return to her mother’s home to give birth. Along the way, she stopped in a grove of sal trees and—delighted by their beauty—decided to give birth there, standing up and holding on to a branch. According to the story, the baby prince emerged from her right side, took seven steps, and proclaimed, “I am the world-honored one.” A few days later, her mission accomplished, Queen Maya died.

To me, this sounds like the version of the myth told by a man who has never given birth. The male baby is the hero of the story, not the mother who gave him life from her body. The woman is the passive vessel for a man’s awakening journey, not a heroine embarked on her own grueling quest to become fully alive. It’s a story stripped of longing, passion, pain, the mess and tangle of human hearts and human relationships, just as surely as it is stripped of sweat and vaginal juices, of amniotic fluid and blood and tears.

How might the story have gone if it had been passed down from grandmother to grandchild over the generations, along with the secrets of grinding spices and gathering dung for cooking fires? I imagine a tale that begins something like this:

Year after year, the king couldn’t quicken the queen’s womb with a baby. So many times she hoped for a child, only to see the blood staining her clothes once again! There were the four who came far too early, just clots of flesh and sorrow to be burned and never spoken of again. And then there was the one who was born perfect, but never cried, whom the king’s physicians weighted with stones and cast to the bottom of the river unburned, as was the custom with saints and lepers.

Then one year, on a visit home to her mother’s house, the wise midwife who attended all the family births gave the queen four bags of herbs to brew into tea. “Drink this one with the start of each monthly blood,” she told her. “Give this to your husband, mixed in his wine, when the moon is new. Then visit the stables at night, give this one to the charioteer, and lie down with him in the straw. And drink this next one every morning after your first missed blood.”

Her tea gave her dreams and visions. Her drugged husband fell into a deep sleep, and the charioteer came at her with the ferocity of a wild elephant, his trunk never resting. Her monthly blood stopped, and she began to grow larger.

Why imagine a fable that begins like this, riddled with disappointment, death, confusion, secrets, lust, lies? Because it says to us all, You too. Out of your broken, screwed-up, incontrovertibly human life—not the imaginary, divinely royal life of your neighbor—something vast and beautiful can be born.

♦

We all want guarantees, in our life, in our practice, that everything is going to work out. We want to guard our hearts and say, I will only love if my heart will not be broken.

But there’s plenty of proof that there are no guarantees. Life is a free fall through an abyss in which everything and everyone we love is eventually guaranteed to disappear.

In opening again to carrying a child inside me [after having a stillbirth], I chose to step forward into this abyss. I chose to participate in bringing life into the world, knowing that every life is, in the words of the Diamond Sutra, “a star at dawn, a bubble in a stream, a flash of lightning in a summer cloud, a flickering lamp, a phantom, and a dream.” Knowing that one day it was not just possible but certain that I and the child I treasure will be separated by death.

And that the only protection I would have is that my love would be large enough to hold even death in its arms.

Imagine the Buddha’s mother’s story continuing:

She pushed for hours, and no child came out.

She forgot that she was the wife of a great chief, the queen of the Shakya clan. She screamed and wept. She could not bear another child lost.

Fearing he would be blamed for the death of the queen, the charioteer fled, leaving his sword for the women to protect themselves as best they could.

The queen’s sister-in-law whispered in her ear, “The gates of your womb are open. But it is not a child’s head, but a foot that is emerging.”

Maya tried to smile. “Trying to walk before he is born!”

But Prajapati did not smile in return. “The baby is trapped between two worlds. He cannot live half in and half out. If he stays there, he will die—and likely, you will too.”

“Is there nothing we can do?” She gazed into the queen’s eyes.

“With the sword of the charioteer, I can slice open your side and release the child that way. And it can live.”

“And I?”

Prajapati shook her head.

The queen did not hesitate.

“Sister. Get the sword.”

♦

Again and again, motherhood demands that we break through our limitations, that we split our hearts open to make room for something that may be more than we thought we could bear. In that sense, the labor with which we give birth is simply a rehearsal for something we mothers must do over and over: turn ourselves inside out, and then let go.

This is something the men who tell this story will never include: Her baby was slippery with blood and vernix. He cried as they put him to the queen’s breast. As he sucked at her nipple, she could feel the rush of her milk letting down to give him strength, even as she felt the strength drain from her own body.

The baby and the queen looked in each other’s eyes.

In a moment, a lifetime of love can flow between two hearts. In the space of a breath, infinity can spread its wings.

“You are my world-honored one,” the queen whispered, stroking his wet hair. And she closed her eyes.
$$$
he challenges of the world can seem insurmountable. They stretch back before we were born and will almost certainly remain after we die. But Zen Buddhist teachings suggest that this is no reason to despair, and that we should embrace the impossibility of our task. At many Zen temples, practitioners will chant four seemingly self-contradictory lines known as the Great Bodhisattva Vows (trans. the Zen Center of Los Angeles):

Sentient beings are numberless, I vow to save them. 
Desires are inexhaustible, I vow to put an end to them. 
The dharmas are boundless, I vow to master them. 
The Buddha Way is unsurpassable, I vow to attain it.

Rather than feeling pointless, these vows inspire believers to follow the path of the bodhisattva, one who resolves to generate bodhicitta (the wish to attain enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings).

Zen priest and poet Norman Fischer says this is exactly the type of attitude we need to work toward a better world today. He makes his case in his new book, The World Could Be Otherwise: Imagination and the Bodhisattva Path (Shambhala, April 2019), which reframes the six perfections—a classical teaching on the virtues of generosity, ethical conduct, patience, joyful effort, meditation, and understanding—for the current moment. The first step, Fischer says, is strengthening our imaginative capacity to see how things can be radically different one day.

Tricycle spoke with Fischer about his new book, the significance of the six perfections, and how our imagination literally shapes the world around us.

You write in the opening chapter of The World Could Be Otherwise, “The saving grace of bodhisattva ideal is that it is so outrageously extravagant, so absurdly imaginative that we are clear from the start that we can never realize it.” That notion of the impossible ends up being central to the book. Can you explain what you mean?
The book is an argument against the pervasive contemporary attitude of Let’s not promise what we can’t deliver, and let’s do something doable. There’s a whole set of assumptions embedded in that kind of thinking. The problem is that we will always become dissatisfied with whatever “real world” solutions we come up with because we can always see beyond them. Human beings have an imagination that can conceive the impossible. We can always say, Well, that’s okay, but that’s not enough. I’m old enough to have seen a million bad political regimes fall and be replaced by the wonderful new regime, which 15 minutes later is now disappointing and terrible.

I want to be clear here. It’s not that I don’t believe in a rational scientific world. I see that worldview and accept its validity. But if we don’t have other ways of imagining the world, if we only pay attention to data, then the conclusion is inescapable: We’re definitely doomed. Dystopia is like five seconds away. That’s what the data tells us. That’s what scientific materialism tells us. We can’t live in that world. We have to live in a world in which the imagination goes beyond that.

In what way can this solutions-oriented approach limit us?
One example is climate change. There’s a tremendous amount that we have to do, but if it’s only about the scientific fixes with no vision and no impossible hope, then we can’t get anywhere. It’s pretty clear that climate change could be fixed or greatly improved, but it’s not political feasible because people believe that altruism doesn’t makes sense—that I’ve got to get mine or the other guys are going to take advantage of me. For political reasons, for psychological and spiritual reasons, we will destroy the Earth, not because of technical reasons.

Why did you frame this book around the six perfections (paramitas)?
We require a path that engages our need for the impossible. The bodhisattva path, which proposes a horizon of universal love that we will never see in our lifetime, is the only thing that will continue to inspire us, and the six paramitas are the simplest way of describing the bodhisattva’s way of life.

Related: What Is a Bodhisattva?

You write that each parimita is “beyond” itself. For example, “ generosity beyond generosity” or “ethical conduct beyond ethics.” What does that mean?
The word that we translate as perfection, paramita, means to go beyond. The sixth paramita, the Paramita of Wisdom, which is said to pervade the other five, specifically means the wisdom that understands the emptiness of all dharmas—that this materialistic world is an illusion and that everything is just a point of connection that rises and falls away in the same moment. That insight gives us a love for everything that arises in every moment, and it’s the way that we practice all the paramitas. They are perfections that take into account the normal virtues, but they go beyond them to a more imaginative, more open, more expansive sense of what those things are.

When Zen practitioners recite the four vows, you say that we’re not really promising to keep it. Could you explain that?
We usually think of a vow as a promise. “I vow to pay you back the $100 I borrowed from you.” But bodhisattva vows are really extravagant and impossible. Sentient beings are infinite in number, and I vow to save them all. What does it mean to recite that vow in earnest? It means, I vow to do my best, to practice kindness and benefit for anyone and everyone. Even though I know that I’ll forget, this is my commitment. Every time I find myself being selfish, I’ll remind myself of this vow, and I’ll pull myself back together again. This is my path. I can forgive myself for all the times that I fall down on the job because inevitably I will.

Related: The Bodhisattva Vows

On the one hand, I know it’s impossible, but on the other hand, I have some imaginative faith that someday, someway sentient beings will be saved. It will work out somehow, not while I’m alive in this short human life, but in some future time, this will happen. I believe it in some crazy way. I can’t convince you of it, I can’t argue for it, but I feel hopeful about humanity because I’ve taken this vow and I’m practicing it every single day. That’s the idea.

Why, then, is the phrase, I vow to save all sentient beings, rather than, I vow to try my best to contribute to the saving of all sentient beings? 
Stating it in the most positive and extravagant way is important because I’m committed to that impossible task of saving all sentient beings, even though I’m not doing it perfectly. “I vow to like try my best to the best I can” is not strong enough—the strength comes from the impossibility and that’s what inspires us.

I see two ways of reading what you lay out in the book about how imagination functions: One is as a secular way of explaining how these practices work—how we can recite the bodhisattva vows and through imagination, the vows can have a practical psychological effect. The other interpretation is that through imagination, something miraculous happens—something impossible. Which of these readings is correct?
I’m saying both those things. It’s actually true that when you change your way of seeing life, the whole world around you literally changes. I hate to say that because it sounds so mystical and weird, but it is, practically speaking, true. If you imagine kindness and that you can see every human being as a worthwhile wonderful person—if you actually imagine that and practice it—it strengthens your imagination, increases your kindness, and then it turns out that you bump into a lot more kind people as a result.

Related: The Bodhisattva Vow: Eight Views

Before, you were living in a world with a whole lot of mean people who are not to be trusted, and now you’re suddenly living in a world where mostly people are benign and trustworthy—and even the people who aren’t, instead of being threatening and looming large, seem like children to be cared for. When a little kid grabs a toy from another kid, you don’t think, Oh, what an evil person! You can think, Oh, what a my poor child! Obviously, the child doesn’t know any better. You don’t think of it as being evidence of a horrible world.

The world around you literally changes in a miraculous way the more thoroughly you practice this path. It is a kind of miracle. What if a lot of people started practicing that way?

How does that work? When is it imagination, and when does it become reality? 
Asking the question in terms of imagination on the one hand and reality on the other is already within the framework of materialist philosophy, which we all completely accept and believe, but it’s too limited. Reality and imagination are not two opposing things. We make reality with our imagination. According to cognitive science and according to philosophers from Immanuel Kant on, we are seeing a world that is created by a whole complex of factors within our human organism, including our sense organs and our imaginations.

We put together the world imaginatively. If we ask, “Is the Eucharist really the body of Christ or are we just imagining it?” The answer is both. It really is the body of Christ, plus we’re imagining it. Scientifically, we can’t say that we can detect in this wafer molecules that were part of the body of Christ, but in our knowing, in our feeling, and in our hearts, we are making something real. So the real question is, What kind of imagination do you want? What kind of imagination do you validate? Do you validate the imagination that reduces the world or do you validate the imagination that expands the world?

If Buddhists, Kant, and other great thinkers across traditions and cultures all find faults in this materialist view, why do we keep falling back on it?
The reason is that it has done a lot of really important work culturally. For one thing, the concept of human rights came out of the materialist moment, which was a big reaction to the excesses and the injustices of hegemony of religion all over the world. Another reason is that the emphasis on science has created a huge amount of good—medical science, the ability to feed the world, and so on. Life was very brutal before we learned that we could understand and manipulate the material world.

I don’t mean to demonize this worldview. We’ve just over emphasized that point of view at the expense of everything else, and now we’ve painted ourselves into a corner. You could argue that it’s the materialist world that is now poisoning the planet as a result of manufacturing plants, fossil-fuel-burning cars, and a huge burst in human population. These were all essentially good things when they came along, but they need to be balanced. I’m not advocating that we go back to old-time religion—that’s impossible and it wouldn’t be a good idea—but we need to see past our exclusivity of world view to a bigger, broader way of holding on it.

You write that in meditation we have to leave the world to find solidarity with it. That seems to speak to a common criticism about meditation being self-absorbed. In other words, why should we spend time looking inward when there are people—right now—out on the streets suffering?
I just came back from a three-month monastic training period, and I thought, How many hours of my life have I spent just sitting there? Just think of all the things I could have done in that time. But considering the fact that so much helping ends up being counterproductive, it is worthwhile to take some time to find within yourself an attitude shift that may make your activity less self-serving, less counterproductive, and perhaps better for the world. And when you sit there long enough, you see all the ins and outs of being human. You see through your own individual spin to the basic stuff at the very, very bottom—which we all share in exactly the same way. Paradoxically, secluding yourself and sitting in silence brings you to a tremendously heartfelt compassion, which is not only, I care about others, but, I am others. I am nothing but others. Others are nothing but me. This is the bodhisattva attitude.
$$$
few years ago, the gallerist of a premier art space in Milan told Italian multidisciplinary artist Michela Martello that representing women was a real challenge.

“Women don’t sell,” Martello recalled him saying in a frank conversation.

Flash forward to May 2018, and Martello and a contingent of Italian artists are presenting “Super S.H.E,” the first all-female group show at Giovanni Bonelli Gallery.

What changed? Martello—a fine artist turned “street-art guru” whose work is influenced by classical Italian painting, Buddhist motifs, and graffiti—told Tricycle that she and other women have been making significant gains in the art world. And now galleries and museums are trying to catch up to the culture, she said.

Dismantling stereotypes of women throughout history will be a common theme in several solo and group shows that Martello is participating in this summer, including Consequential Stranger in Raleigh, North Carolina, where Martello is displaying her Buddhist spin on Botticelli’s Renaissance masterpiece, The Birth of Venus.  

buddhist artist michela martello in her studio
Martello in her Brooklyn studio with her gesso-on-linen paintings Future is Goddess (left, 2016) and Don Giovanni (2017) | Photo by Federica Valabrega
Her version of Venus is a female wisdom deity known as a dakini, meaning “sky dancer” or literally “she who moves through space.” Martello’s dakini-Venus is gestating a Tibetan snow lion, a symbol of fearlessness and a reference to Shakyamuni Buddha, while crushing a medieval Gothic demon.

“She’s taking steps toward the sky and is not afraid to occupy the entire canvas. Nowadays, women can stretch themselves and are empowered to do so,” Martello said, reflecting on the current climate. “A few years ago, especially in Italy, this was still unthinkable.”

Visualizing images of empowered female figures is an important part of Martello’s personal practice and art-making process. “But you certainly don’t have to be a woman, a Buddhist, or an iconography expert to relate to dakini energy,” she said.

Related: Dancing with the Divine Feminine

Also featured in the Raleigh exhibit (which opened this April and will run through June 1) are what appear to be pottery relics from Ancient Rome. On closer look, the clay shards are, in fact, broken fragments of a female body: a brain, eyes, ears, teeth, heart, lungs, intestines, uterus, and breasts, along with a strand of DNA. The collection nods to the Buddhist idea that we are a sum of our parts rather than an essentialized, fixed self.


Psychedelic Relics | Courtesy Michela Martello
In many ways, Future is Goddess and the ceramic relics merge Martello’s Italian and Buddhist visual vocabulary, but this coupling hasn’t always come so easily.

Trained as an illustrator at the Europe Institute of Design, Martello felt that the traditional techniques and methods taught in school could be incredibly rigid, especially when it came to depictions of women.

“My style has always been somewhat oppositional and spontaneous,” she said. Often, her teachers commented that her subjects were either too spiritual or ethereal. But Martello believes that arts education in Italy is beginning to break from its “highly conceptual and often chauvinistic art forms.”

In the nineties, soon after meeting her Buddhist teacher, the late Tibetan master Chogyal Namkhai Norbu, Martello moved to New York City, where she found the art scene more open to transgressive thinking.

“In Italy, I would have struggled to assert myself. But thanks to institutions like Pen and Brush, a 125-year-old nonprofit in Manhattan, women in the arts are supported in an ongoing way.

“When we lift each other up,” she added, “stereotypes become old ghosts.”

Related: Nasty Women Meditation

Martello’s large-scale murals, sculptures, and collages have since headlined at several feminist exhibits and public arts installations. Many of her creations are made by repurposing quilts, US Army tents, vintage fabrics, pages from Shakespeare plays, animal skulls, and human hair. The resulting pieces are as inventive as they are provocative.

buddhist artist michela martello
Martello sits in front of Rept Brain (2017, acrylic and antique lace on canvas) | Photo by Federica Valabrega
Women breaking down constructs and taking flight is the theme of Wings to Fly, a Frida Kahlo-inspired exhibit that pays tribute to the Mexican painter and pop-feminist icon. The modest showcase, on view at the PBX Gallery in downtown Brooklyn through June 9, features artwork by Martello and Indian-American Jewish painter Siona Benjamin, along with select pieces from others, who use art to think critically about their national, religious, and gender identities.

With Outsider, a self-portrait akin to Kahlo’s contour drawings, Martello explores and challenges the way we craft our own images and identities around the often constrictive roles that we are expected to perform.


Outsider (2002, graphite on paper) | Courtesy Michela Martello
In another of Martello’s works at Wings to Fly, pages from Shakespeare’s King John and kimono fabric are stitched together to form the body and brocade of Yabyum, a nontraditional thangka, or Buddhist scroll painting. At its center, a male and female deity are locked in sexual embrace—a Vajrayana visual device that’s often misunderstood as an obscene display of eroticism. The symbolic union of the tantric pair signifies two aspects of enlightenment—wisdom and compassion—coming together, and the image is meant to uproot the sources of ignorance and suffering.

Martello explained that sitting with this and other Buddhist imagery is part of her practice, which she turns to when she gets bogged down by discursive thoughts in order to gain some perspective and reestablish her balance.


Yabyum (2015, red Indian pigment, kimono fabric collage) | Courtesy Michela Martello
Together, Buddhism and feminism have led Martello to discover hidden parts of herself that manifest during the creative process. “When I’m making art, I can look honestly at myself, confront the shadows and insecurities, and eventually integrate their opposites into my life and work,” she said.

In both her art and Buddhist practice, doubt plays a key role in her ability to work through anger, depression, and creative blocks. On one of her first retreats with Namkhai Norbu at Merigar West, the Dzogchen center he founded in Tuscany, Martello was drowning in uncertainty. At the time, she was in her early 30s, unmarried, and without children.

“It can be difficult to talk openly with other women about pregnancy, child-rearing, and motherhood. Doubting is seen as a sign of weakness, when really it’s the opposite,” she said.

Raising questions around femininity and womanhood is what spurred Martello to produce a series of ceramic dolls, a handful of which are in the Raleigh exhibit. Not on display is Eva, a doll with a dark hole where her womb would be and the words I am not sure I want to have children in this life printed on her Victorian-style dress.


Eva (2018, ceramic glaze, gold leaf) | Courtesy Michela Martello
“Investigating the mind is always risky, yet Eva is celebrating doubts,” Martello explained.

Likewise, questioning the norms we inherit as individuals and societies can be uncomfortable, painful, and destructive, but it can also create something beautiful.

“I take refuge in doubt,” Martello went on. “Without it, I couldn’t grow.”
$$$
Sogyal Rinpoche and Sakyong Mipham . . . alas, yet another wave of scandals around issues of sexual abuse by Buddhist teachers. In this case, public outcry has been partly inspired by the #MeToo movement, but is anyone still surprised by the recurring pattern?

Western Buddhists will presumably continue to do what we’ve done in the past: as disheartened students move on from their troubled communities, those on the outside will share their dismay for a while, until something else comes along to divert their attention. Before that happens, however, I think we should take a moment to examine whether these scandals keep repeating because they are symptomatic of something deeper.

If an abusive teacher is enlightened, why did he (it’s almost always a “he”) act so badly? Some students remain in denial, offering one excuse or another: it really wasn’t that bad; everyone shares responsibility for what happened; it was done for the student’s own good. Those who accept the disturbing revelations find themselves in a dilemma: either their teacher wasn’t that enlightened after all, in which case they’ve been conned, or enlightenment isn’t what they thought, which can be even more distressing.

Of the many issues raised in the discussions of the recurring problem of abuse, it seems to me there is a key aspect that has yet to receive the attention it deserves. In addition to the power differential in the relationship between a spiritual teacher and a student, there is often a spiritual transference. Like psychological transference in psychotherapy, spiritual transference can be beneficial to the student or, as we keep seeing, it can be harmful. How the transference is handled determines which it will be.

Related: Will Sanghas Learn from the Scandals in the Buddhist World?

In psychotherapy, transference is a clinical term describing our unconscious tendency to redirect emotions and behavior felt toward someone in the past, like a parent, and project them onto someone else in the present (for example, one’s therapist or guru). It is a common way of trying to fill up our sense of lack by subordinating ourselves to someone who, we feel, is more real than we are, someone who can take care of us. Transference reveals how we remain childlike, misperceiving the world in order to compensate for a persistent, deeply rooted sense of inadequacy. As we mature, the urge to find security by subjecting ourselves to others often persists, transferred from parents to other authority figures such as teachers—including spiritual teachers.

This urge is not simply an emotional dependence but a matter of experiencing the other as one’s whole world, just as the family is for a young child. In his book The Denial of Death, the existential psychologist and cultural anthropologist Ernest Becker writes, “Mirabile! The transference object, being endowed with the transcendent powers of the universe, now has in himself the power to control, order, and combat them.”

According to Becker, this personification of our highest yearnings and strivings explains our urge to deify others, including (especially!) spiritual teachers: “The more they have, the more rubs off on us. We participate in their immortality, and so we create immortals.” Wanting to participate in our teacher’s enlightened being, we create the teacher as a being who is superior to us.

When you are surrounded by people who think you are godlike, and treat you that way, the danger is that after a while you will begin to agree with them.
The problem is that this process is largely unconscious and uncritical, a form of wishful thinking. One becomes extremely vulnerable to the views and actions of such a teacher, whose authority can easily be abused. But there is also a more positive aspect to transference. The person we identify with can motivate us to transform our three poisons: greed into generosity, ill will into loving-kindness, and delusion of a separate self into the wisdom of our interdependence.

No matter how well it functions, however, there comes a time when the transference needs to be broken—a process that almost always involves some pain. Spiritual maturity requires us to withdraw the projection and stand on our own feet. The teacher may be wise and compassionate, but he or she is also human, with some of the same foibles and shortcomings that afflict the rest of us. Breaking the transference requires not a breakdown in the relationship but a more mature version based on mutual respect. Instead of subordinating ourselves to the buddhanature of the teacher, we realize our own buddhanature and are guided by our own inner gyroscope.

Ideally, teachers will have some intuitive understanding of transference. Even if they don’t know anything about psychotherapy, they are able to use the transference to motivate and direct the student. At its best, this includes knowing when to break it, or helping it to end in a way that minimizes the inevitable awkwardness. Again, however, the relationship does not always progress so smoothly. In particular, teachers can get caught up in what psychoanalysis calls the counter-transference. And that brings us back to the problem of teacher abuse, sexual and otherwise.

When you are surrounded by people who think you are godlike, and treat you that way, the danger is that after a while you will begin to agree with them. Of course, one would hope that spiritual teachers would not fall into that trap, but obviously some do. We might suppose that such teachers are not yet mature enough in their own practice, but some of them are recognized by their tradition as possessing the qualifications to take on the responsibilities of being a teacher. And then things get tricky.

Related: Unmasking the Guru

The power differential that encourages transference opens up possibilities that are complicated by the freedom that the Buddhist path enables. According to the Zen tradition, those who have realized their true nature are free to follow conventional morality or not, and I believe that Tibetan tantra emphasizes the same thing. This freedom arises from the recognition that social morality is a cultural construct rather than an absolute set of ethical principles. The Mahayana concept of “skillful means,” upaya kaushalya, incorporates this insight: there may be occasions when, for the good of others, it is appropriate to break even basic Buddhist precepts.

Needless to say, such freedom can be abused. Yet this insight into the ultimate “emptiness” of moral codes highlights one of the most distinctive aspects of Buddhism: its focus on understanding and alleviating dukkha, “suffering,” right here and now. Fundamentally, the Buddhist path is not about good versus evil and salvation from sin, but ignorance versus awakening and developing the wisdom that sees through delusions that lead to dukkha.

The logic of Buddhism’s ethical perspective holds that those who are genuinely awakened will not be inclined to abuse others, because awakening frees them from the bonds of self-centered views and passions and causes them to refrain from behavior, including sexual behavior, that creates dukkha. For those who have ceased to view themselves as a separate self, external guidelines such as the precepts may be helpful as rules of thumb, but in the end they should not even be necessary.

That’s the principle, anyway. The long list of abuses by many so-called enlightened masters raises questions, of course. If awakening is very rarely (if ever) a matter of all or nothing, and if it isn’t integrated in a way that actually reforms self-centered habits, the freedom of realization can encourage and rationalize taking advantage of one’s position. And although awakening tends to make one less inhibited, is that always a good thing? If, as Buddhism emphasizes, the (sense of) self is mainly composed of habitual ways of thinking, feeling, acting, and so forth, then “letting go of oneself ” can include letting go of ego-constraints that prevent some problematic patterns of behavior. Like alcohol, this letting go can also “free” us from self-consciousness—and foster the difficulties that sometimes ensue. A practitioner—whose transference may include being enamored—may not be able to think clearly about the consequences of unskillful actions, but the teacher has a responsibility, and supposedly the wisdom, to understand the implications and set appropriate boundaries.

Given the potential difficulties with spiritual transference (and countertransference) in teacher-student relationships, it is important to understand the strong and largely unconscious tendency to romanticize spiritual leaders and the spiritual path. This entails, I would say, a more modest way of thinking about awakening itself. Rather than regard it as a superior state of being that some special people have attained, we might instead speak of awakened activity, which is motivated by altruism and compassion. It’s one thing to have experiences of profound realization, but something else—and much more difficult!—to integrate those insights into how one actually lives in the world, day by day, moment by moment. As another spiritual teacher once remarked, by their fruits shall you know them.