Anyone who doesn’t know Arabic faces many obstacles reading the Qur’an. The last thing they need is an archaic translation. Though cheap and popular, Marmaduke Pickthall’s The Meaning of the Glorious Koran: An Explanatory Translation is very archaic, making it hard for modern readers to grasp. Yusuf Ali’s The Meaning of the Holy Qur’an suffers from archaic speech also, though its Sunni commentary (in the footnotes) can be helpful. A.J. Arberry’s The Koran Interpreted: A Translation remains a scholarly standard in many respects, but archaic English weakens it too.

Modernization of the Qur’an’s contents is the other major problem in translations, with some recent ones being the worst offenders. When such modernization—or even Christianization—contaminates it, a translation reflects our thinking, not that of the Qur’an. Unfortunately, this problem is as hard for non-Arabic speakers to detect as the first problem is easy.

For example, Q 4:34 tells Muslim men to beat their wives if they suspect them of being unruly. Many translators modernize the word iḍribuhunna (strike or hit them) here. Yusuf Ali’s translation adds the word “lightly” in parenthesis. The problem is that the Arabic text has no such qualifier and most English readers won’t know that. Laleh Bakhtiar’s The Sublime Qur’an goes even further, excising the entire idea of corporal punishment and, so, failing miserably to interpret the Qur’an in context. Though M.A.S. Abdel Haleem’s The Qur’an: A New Translation evidences fine scholarship in many respects, it too is sometimes weakened by a modernizing tendency. At least with Q 4:34, it confines that tendency to a footnote that allows husbands to give their wives a single slap. It’s understandable that Screen Shot 2018-03-15 at 10.09.53 AMtranslators want to make this seventh-century command fit current values and, so, make it more pleasing to modern (Western-inspired) sensibilities. But such modernization flies in the face of the hadith, which demonstrate that the first Muslim generations had no precise understanding of the sort of beating advocated.

For centuries Muslims couldn’t translate the Qur’an. Nowadays new Muslim translations seem to pop up every other day, but most of them exhibit serious modernization. Some non-Muslim translations fail here too.

My first choice of translation is Alan Jones’s The Qur’an (pictured on the right). Jones gives us a readable translation that avoids modernizing quite consistently. The serious scholar will also want to consult A.J. Droge’s The Qur’an: A New Annotated Translation, a thoroughly researched version, with detailed notes reflecting current Qur’an scholarship. A translation to watch for is Gordon Nickel’s  Qur’an with Christian Commentary, to be published by Zondervan later this year.

Even with a solid translation, the Qur’an is hard to understand. Most non-Muslims find its non-chronological order and lack of contextual markers utterly bewildering. So, I strongly encourage you to read the Qur’an in chronological order, along with a guide to its story. Also, consulting a book that compares and contrasts the Qur’an with the Bible is vital, since the Qur’an claims to be the Bible’s sequel. And one challenge we all face is determining how the Muslim scripture agrees with and differs from the Bible.
$$$
What does the Qur’an teach about the afterlife?
Posted April 26, 2019 by Mark Anderson
Leave a comment
 
Many non-Muslims picture the qur’anic heaven as an eternal orgy in which the faithful freely engage in all kinds of sexual perversion with full immunity. This libertine version has a long history in the West,[1] and American Christians won’t easily be disabused of it. Not with writers like Sam Shamoun recasting the qur’anic heaven in the most despicable terms possible, as “Allah’s brothel.”[2]

While the Qur’an does emphasize heaven’s sensual pleasures, those are not the sum total of its pleasures. Because the Qur’an also points to heaven’s spiritual and religious delights. It repeatedly assures believers that heaven will be a place where they will know neither sadness nor fear (Q 2:38, 62, 7:35, 46:13). God is presented as the believers’ host in paradise, with the best of those admitted favored with a vision of him. In qur’anic terms, they’re allowed to glimpse his face (Q 2:272, 13:22, 30:38-39, 56:11, 75:22-23, 83:24, 28). This joy is reserved for only some, however, and it doesn’t suggest either the intimacy of personal friendship with God or union with God.

Overall, the qur’anic vision of paradise doesn’t emphasize God’s presence to the same degree that it focuses on the believers’ comfort, luxury and sensual pleasure.
For male believers, its sensual pleasure does include fantastic sex. But the heavenly vision is distinctly religious and allows for no sexual perversion whatsoever—at least, not as defined by the Qur’an.

Besides belief in God, Muhammad’s pagan hearers mocked belief in physical resurrection, final judgment and the afterlife. They insisted that this life is all there is. The only immortality they sought was that of earning a level of fame that long outlives us. Hence, the pre-Islamic poets celebrated those Arab heroes who set the standard for brave warfare, for over-the-top generosity and for wild revelry in wine, women and song. Muhammad soundly rejected such godlessness, recklessness and immorality. He stressed the reality of God, physical resurrection and final judgment. The Qur’an condemned drunken excess and never once spoke positively of music. But we see traces of the pre-Islamic concept of immortality in heaven’s lavish abundance, including the consorts male believers are given.

The Qur’an basically pictures heaven in terms of the life of seventh-century Arabia’s wealthiest nobles, men who enjoyed lavish feasts in lush private gardens, in the region’s richest oases.[3] Being poor, most of Muhammad’s early followers could only ever dream of such a life. Hence, this vision of the super-rich lifestyle, taken to the nth degree, had strong appeal to them. The Qur’an describes believers feasting in heaven amidst the richest of fabrics and furnishings, and of rivers flowing with not just fresh water—extremely scarce in the region—but also with milk, honey and wine.

What about the virgins? Being firmly committed to the idea of physical resurrection, the Qur’an pictures believers enjoying consummate physical pleasure. Since we’re sexual beings, God’s provisions include everything believers need to be perfectly happy. For believing males, that includes not just luxurious feasting and rest.

The qur’anic reward also includes the very best sex possible. But due to its strict moral standards for public discourse, the Qur’an only implies the sex, leaving all the details of heaven’s sexual delights to men’s imaginations.
Modernists today extract the Qur’an’s implied mentions of heaven’s sex from their seventh-century Arab context to reinterpret the words such that they don’t intend sex at all.[4] But for many reasons, the words would have had no other meaning in the context of seventh-century Arabia:

Any man in Muhammad’s polygynous culture would have expected a life of total abundance to include all the polygynous sex he could dream of.[5]
The Qur’an gave Arab men no reason to think otherwise, given that it accepted polygynous marriage and that Muhammad himself modeled it.[6]
While permitting polygynous sex, the Qur’an simultaneously fostered a culture that, like Britain’s Victorian culture, considered open talk about sex immoral.
Hence, the Qur’an only implied the sex, since anything more would not maintain the dignity and public decorum required of a religious scripture.
Since sex partners were often part of an Arab victor’s spoils, it was reasonable that the Qur’an would promise sex partners, as part of the Muslim soldier’s heavenly reward.[7]
This interpretation is supported by all the early commentators, which interpreted the Qur’an’s allusions to heavenly sex to be just that. The hadith were in full agreement too, eagerly elaborating on the details: none questioned that heavenly sex was promised. Even the later Sufis, who sought to spiritualize the Qur’an’s references to heavenly sex, never disputed the fact that it was fantastic sexual unions they were spiritualizing.

The qur’anic paradise can thus be viewed as a religious recasting of the pre-Islamic concept of attaining immortality through superabundant indulgence in luxury and sensual pleasure.[8]
When the Qur’an promised male believers—not just martyrs—virginally pure, doe-eyed, full-breasted partners (Q 55:22-23, 78:31-34), it was offering them the very best of polygynous sex.[9] It gives no numbers, but it does describe the women and their surroundings. Q 55:72-76, for example, promises men “women (hur) reserved for them in cool pavilions…  whom neither men nor demons (jinn) have touched… reclining on green cushions and lovely carpets.”[10] Hence, the commentator al-Suyuti (d. 1505) expounded that male believers would have virtually non-stop sex in heaven, along with the sexual stamina to engage in it. While that may represent a humorous exaggeration, Suyuti was at least right to understand that, in heaven, the Qur’an promises abundant sexual pleasure with multiple female partners.

To monogamists and most feminists today, that suggests debauchery. But not to polygynists in Muhammad’s society, who allowed men, but not women, to have multiple concurrent sex partners.
The Qur’an modified Arabia’s sexual norms significantly, by forbidding sex outside of its three legal expressions: heterosexual marriage, concubinage and slavery. It also limited the number of wives a man could simultaneously have to just four. But it never repudiated Arabia’s polygyny—that men, but not women, could enjoy multiple sexual partners concurrently. Nor did it limit the number of concubines or slave girls a man could have sex with.

Hence, Suyuti’s interpretation doesn’t license debauchery, qur’anically defined. Viewed as glorified concubines, heaven’s multiple virgin sex partners in no way violate the Qur’an’s patriarchal moral standards. Far from being a brothel or sexual free-for-all, this heaven is a place where all its male residents—not just the wealthy—will enjoy super-abundant moral sex with all the women God gives them, in an ideal atmosphere of moral purity, qur’anically understood.[11]

What about the reward of female believers in paradise? Judging by the fact that it says little about the topic, the Qur’an seems to have little interest in it:

It makes a few general statements to assure women that, being equally responsible to obey God, they’ll be rewarded along with their men (e.g. Q 4:124, 33:35).
But it otherwise pictures them only in relation to male believers, who will have their wives and children with them. (Q 36:56).
It never promises female believers sexual pleasure equivalent to that of their men, nor would any woman in Muhammad’s audience ever have expected such equality.
Indeed, the idea that women would have multiple heavenly male partners would have been as offensive to Arabs in Muhammad’s day, as to Muslims today.
The Qur’an says nothing about how their husbands’ abundant sexual activity will affect their wives.
Maybe we should assume that female believers will be free from all insecurity and jealousy in heaven and, thus, will delight in their husbands’ enjoyment of sexual abundance. But how women will feel about such polygyny seems not to be a qur’anic concern at all.

The view of heaven presented above is that of traditional Islam, both Sunni and Shia. It’s not merely that of “fundamentalist Islam,” a very slippery term. Rather, it’s held by the vast majority of Muslims worldwide.
As mentioned above, Sufis typically spiritualize—almost Christianize—heaven’s sex.[12] Modernists also present a different view of heaven, one that fits with their commitment to monogamy and gender equality.
$$$
The issue of Muslim demographics is controversial and emotive to say the least. Millions of Christians have viewed the infamous video about Muslim demographics, currently listed on Youtube under the heading “Islam Will Take Over the World in Fifty Years.” This video purports to give viewers a true picture of Muslim population growth and projections. But it fails miserably in both.

While the video doesn’t explicitly say Islam is taking over the world, it does say Islam will be the world’s “dominant religion” in 5-7 years. But it makes other startling claims about Muslim population growth that jointly point to something like a Muslim tide threatening to destroy Western civilization. And the video makes all its claims in a sinister tone suggesting that a conspiracy of the worst order is afoot. Sadly, the video’s concluding call for world evangelization reveals it to be a Christian production. And it makes all its projections incognito, which only underscores the hideous nature of its propaganda.

We can thank the BBC for putting out the video “Muslim Demographics: The Truth” to correct the Christian video’s numerous distortions. Beyond its hideous fearmongering tone, it is to be sharply criticized for its abuse of both quotations and demographic data. What could be worse than putting together a package of exaggerations and misquotations, all in the name of truth, as the BBC has shown this video does? The BBC’s response concludes with this vital caution:

Due to the challenging nature of population projection, reasonable predictions can only be made if we “find the most accurate data available and then treat that data with very great care.”
The Christian video, alas, begins with inaccurate data, which it then treats cavalierly.



Another BBC production, “Islam: The World’s Fastest Growing Religion,” presents other facts and projections on Muslim demographics. UN figures demonstrate that Islam is now the world’s fastest growing religion, due to its younger population and higher birth rates. According to the PEW Forum, Islam will be the world’s largest religion by the year 2070 if current trends continue. More immediately, Muslims and Christians are together projected to make up over 60% of the world’s population by 2050, just 32 years from now. That should inspire us to think well about the kind of world we Christians and Muslims want to share.

If we aim to live by the Golden Rule, we’ll take care to represent the other side both fairly and accurately.
Some will undoubtedly fault the BBC for presenting only the positive side of Muslim demographics and never looking beyond. I admit there’s justification for their complaint. But that must be the topic of another post.
$$$
Is Islam inherently violent? Karen Armstrong gets it wrong
Posted April 28, 2018 by Mark Anderson
2 comments
 
We should commend religious scholar Karen Armstrong for using her TED Prize to champion compassion in interfaith and other relations. She’s also right to condemn anyone whose criticism of Islam is “neither accurate, fair, nor well-informed.”[1] But her moral crusading doesn’t exempt her from her own standards. And she’s neither accurate, fair nor well-informed in what she says of Islam.

When a Dutch interviewer asked, “Is there any difference between Jesus and Muhammad in terms of violence—or in other words, how do you explain that most terrorism now is inspired by Islam?” she replied:

“Terrorism has nothing to do with Muhammad, any more than the Crusades had anything to do with Jesus. There is nothing in Islam that is more violent than Christianity. All religions have been violent, including Christianity. There was nothing in the Muslim world like anti-Semitism: that is an import of the modern period. They got it from us. The missionaries brought it over…”[2]

Armstrong is technically right to say that:

Muhammad* was unfamiliar with modern-day terrorism
He never commanded terrorism per se
Historically speaking, all of the world religions have been violent
Christians may have slaughtered as many people as Muslims have
Zionism has made modern Judaism violent
But she altogether sidesteps the question about the difference between Jesus and Muhammad.* Jesus only ever calls his followers to love their enemies—never to engage in warfare. Muhammad* repeatedly urged his followers to engage in warfare. She clearly wants to erase this major difference between Jesus and Muhammad.*

Armstrong is right to defend Muhammad’s honor against the charge that he was a terrorist. But she’s wrong to suggest that he didn’t reinstate religious violence, as a military general.
Muhammad* clearly

Required his followers to enlist in his military campaign to take Mecca
Fought and killed people unwilling to submit to his rule
Promised that God would give any of his soldiers killed in battle immediate entrance to paradise[3]
Furthermore, Armstrong’s claim that Muslims weren’t anti-Semitic before Christian missionaries brought anti-Semitism to them is really preposterous.

Muhammad* was no more violent than Emperor Heraclius, his Byzantine contemporary. But the Qur’an clearly reinstated religious violence, giving it a place well beyond mere self-defence. And we have abundant historical documentation that the early Muslims did as commanded, engaging in armed struggle (jihad) so effectively that they conquered much of the world within a century.

Unfortunately, when Armstrong claims the Qur’an authorizes only self-defensive warfare, people assume she’s a trustworthy authority on Islam’s formative history. In fact, she’s simply determined to remake Muhammad* into a Christ-like advocate of nonviolence—let history be damned. She knows reformist Muslims have no hope have of ridding their faith of its violent legacy except in separating Muhammad* and his first followers from their historical context. If she’s convinced herself that what she says is actually true, then she’s self-deceived. I sincerely wish this were not so—that the Qur’an and early Muslim history aligned with my many warm, peace-loving Muslim friends. But we can’t simply wish the past away.

I wish I had a different answer to the question of whether or not Islam is inherently violent—as this leaves me holding two things in tension.
The vast majority of Muslims want to live peaceably with non-Muslims, and I don’t question their sincerity. But I can’t join Armstrong in denying early Islam’s religious violence. She doubtless sees it as vital to avoid unleashing untold hatred on our Muslim friends. But we’re called to speak truth, not twist it. And that isn’t just wrong here. It’s also counterproductive, strengthening both Islamic extremism and all its alt-right imitators.
$$$
Islam’s Sunni-Shia Divide Explained
Posted March 28, 2018 by Mark Anderson
3 comments
 
The world’s Muslims fall into two major camps, Sunni and Shia, sometimes likened to Christianity’s Catholics and Protestants. But the similarity is superficial. In terms of the world’s total Muslim population, Sunnis and Shias disagree over what percentage each group owns, with Sunnis accounting for 80-90% of the total and Shias 10-20%.

After Muhammad’s death in 632 CE, the struggle over who should succeed him made Islam’s next half-century very turbulent. In fact, three of Muhammad’s first four successors were assassinated. The Sunni-Shia division goes back to that early conflict.

Ali, Muhammad’s cousin and son-in-law, was chosen by the larger community as his fourth successor. But a minority claimed Muhammad had appointed Ali and his family line to succeed him, and that Ali would have led from the first if powerful families hadn’t sidelined him. That minority came to be known as the Shia, from the Arabic shicat cAli, or “partisans of Ali.” The Sunnis, their opponents, countered that, by letting a majority of Muslim leaders decide, they followed Muhammad’s sunna, or “way” of choosing.[1]

After Ali’s assassination in 661, the split only widened. In 670, Ali’s first son Hassan was murdered. Then in 680, in what both sides agree was an act of treachery, the Sunni caliph’s representative beheaded Ali’s remaining son, Husayn, at Karbala, in modern-day Iraq. He killed most of Husayn’s companions and family with him, his infant son Ali included.

Given this history, Sunnis and Shias naturally diverge on various theological and practical issues. One defining practice of Twelver Shias, for example, is their annual ritual commemoration of Husayn and his companions’ martyrdom. The Sunni-Shia split is also marked by sharp disagreement over


Husayn’s shrine at Karbala
How the schism unfolded, including which characters are heroes
Which hadith are accepted
Matters of law, on such things as marriage and divorce
The authority of Muhammad’s rightful successors, whether caliphs (Sunni) or imams (Shia)[2]
How history will play out and the role of the Mahdi, an eschatological deliverer from external evils
But despite their many differences, Sunnis and Shias agree on the centrality of Muhammad and the Qur’an to their faith. Hence, they hold similar views on most of the basics:

Islam’s “five pillars,” or essential practices—the creed, ritual prayers, almsgiving, Ramadan and pilgrimage to Mecca
The prophets and scriptures before Muhammad
The nature of the believer’s relationship to God[3] [3]
That salvation is earned by good deeds and loyalty to the Muslim community
The Last Day’s vital importance

The Kaaba, home to all Muslims
The news media often report on violence between Sunnis and Shias in places like Iraq and Pakistan. Such violence is tragic and must not be minimized, especially with the threat of a nuclearized Iran (Shia) and Saudi Arabia (Sunni) before us. But Muslims who complain that these reports distort the picture are partly right because our news media’s business model “both assumes and heightens polarization,”[4] and most Sunnis and Shias coexist peaceably. It’s equally true, however, that Sunni-Shia rivalry will remain a destabilizer wherever either sect is considered a threat in the Muslim world. That is, as long as both versions of Islamism—Shia and Sunni—are alive and well.[5] And neither currently shows any sign of abating.