The United States is in the midst of a mental health crisis. In what will be a series of posts, I hope to offer some guidance to individuals who are concerned that someone they know will harm either themselves or others. Throughout these posts, I hope to discuss methods of broaching the difficult subject of inquiring into the mental health of someone you care about; to provide guidance on how to encourage those who have been prescribed medication to remain on medication; and to describe what happens when an individual is taken to a hospital to receive treatment either voluntarily or involuntarily. When possible, I hope to provide additional resources.

Ultimately, my goal is to equip friends and family members with a brief guide so they can anticipate the road ahead. In many cases, taking on a more active role may be challenging, but the costs of doing nothing can be far too high to ignore.

Though there is no way to properly quantify the magnitude of these costs, a report from the Centers for Disease Prevention and Control does give us an idea of how large the scope of the mental health crisis in this country is. The CDC found that, between 1999 and 2017, the suicide rate increased 33 percent—from 10.5 per 100,000 Americans to 14.0. More concerning is that the average rate of increase has accelerated in recent years. Between 1999 and 2006, the number of suicides in the US has increased by around 1 percent per year. Between 2006 and 2017, the average rate of change was closer to 2 percent. One of the most invaluable resources is the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. You can visit their website (here) or you can reach them by phone at 1-800-273-8255. These resources will help you tailor a specific plan of action for how to speak with your friend or loved one. As you'll come to find, there are different ways to broach the subject and talk about it, and the best technique to employ will depend on circumstances unique to you and the person you care about.  

In 2017 alone, 47,173 Americans took their own lives.

While this number is staggering, it is dwarfed by the number of people who attempted suicide. The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention estimates that that number was 1.4 million in 2017. To put that in perspective, that is roughly the entire population of the city of San Diego—the 8th largest city in the United States.

That such a large number of Americans not only feel such despair but decide to act on it should be a terrifying wake-up call to anyone who may have concerns about the mental health of a family member, loved one, or friend. However, suicide is not the only symptom of the nation’s mental health crisis that should be prompting a call to action. Nor is it the most visible symptom. That ignominy belongs to gun violence.

With shocking regularity, we receive news alerts on our phones informing us that yet again there is an active shooter terrorizing a school or a campus or a synagogue or a church or a movie theater or a bar or an office or a newsroom or a military installation. With almost equal regularity, we hear stories about missed opportunities to prevent the crisis and people who lament their hesitation or believe that their reticence caused lives. They noted the warning signs and saw a change in behavior that portended trouble but didn’t want to rock the boat.

Mental Disorders v. Unhealthy Mentalities

There are myriad reasons why so many Americans commit these violent acts. However, not all of them can be traced back to a mental illness. To be clear, people who walk into public places and open fire are not mentally healthy, but to automatically assume that they have a mental illness like schizophrenia or bipolar disorder is wrong. Similarly, to assume that someone who has suicidal thoughts has a mental illness is equally wrong. Just because a person is mentally unhealthy does not mean they have a mental illness.

To assume that a change in behavior or a sudden fixation on committing a violent act against others or to oneself is due to a mental illness is simply inaccurate. A study out of John Hopkins Center for Mental Health and Addiction Policy Research published in a 2016 issue of Health Affairs found that 9 percent of the perpetrators of mass shootings between 1994 and 2005 were described as being mentally ill, while that number increased to 22 percent between 2006. Making such assumptions also places additional stigmas on mental illness and overlooks the tremendous impact that large amounts of environmental stressors can inflict on a person’s mental well-being. It also uses individuals with mental illnesses as scapegoats and sweeps under the rug the social causes of violence.

article continues after advertisement

There is a major difference between being mentally ill and mentally unhealthy. A mentally ill individual has a disorder that can be diagnosed and treated. It can oftentimes be caused by genetic factors, environmental factors, biological factors, or a combination of the three. Most symptoms can be mitigated with treatment, which oftentimes has a pharmacological component. There are millions of Americans with mental illnesses who receive treatment and live normal, healthy lives.

Conversely, a mentally unhealthy individual is someone who does not have a diagnosable condition but may be emotionally disturbed due to a variety of factors. In some cases, the disturbance may be linked to a substance abuse problem. Other common issues include childhood trauma or a developmental issue. This may lead them to have difficulties controlling their anger or refraining from impulsive and violent actions. These are clinically distinct from mental illnesses and require different kinds of treatment plans.

If you are concerned that someone may hurt themselves or others, it does not matter if they have a mental illness or not. Do not fall into the trap of thinking that they will snap out of it or that they do not pose a threat to themselves or others because they do not have a mental illness. You need to take an active role.

Taking the Initiative

People who are struggling with a mental illness or with their mental health very frequently do not solicit help from others. They may be embarrassed, they may not want to appear vulnerable, or they may not recognize that they have a problem. This means that you must take the first step.

article continues after advertisement

This is not an easy task. The person you are hoping to help could vehemently deny that any problem exists, perceive your concern as a form of betrayal, accuse you of possessing ulterior motives, or even become violent at the suggestion that they are struggling with any issues at all. Then again, they may recognize that they have a problem and agree that they should seek help and will voluntarily begin treatment. The response depends upon a host of factors with which you may not be familiar when you decide to encourage them to seek treatment.

While there is no single guide that can fully prepare you for the experience, there are steps that you can take to prepare yourself. One of the most invaluable resources is the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. You can visit their website (here) or you can reach them by phone at 1-800-273-8255. These resources will help you tailor a specific plan of action for how to speak with your friend or loved one. As you'll come to find, there are different ways to broach the subject and talk about it, and the best technique to employ will depend on circumstances unique to you and the person you care about. 

The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention advises that you be blunt when you bring up the subject of suicide, but that you should not make it a public forum. By bringing in a group of people to discuss the matter, it may make them feel as though they are on trial, which can lead some to become more ashamed and more distant. Worse, it may cause them to camouflage the problem.

If someone you know and love appears as though they are considering suicide, speak to them in private, allow them to vocalize their feelings, tell that you care about them, and encourage them to make an appointment with a mental health professional. Avoid philosophizing about the meaning of life or giving advice. In the worst-case scenario, this may provide them with a perverse rationale for hurting themselves. They may also feel as though you are trivializing their suffering. When someone is seriously considering suicide, they should speak to a trained professional who can provide them with treatment options.

article continues after advertisement

However, if you believe that your loved one is in imminent danger of hurting themselves or others, you should call 911 immediately or take them to a hospital. If you feel as though you will not be placed in imminent danger by doing so, you should stay with them to ensure that they are admitted by doctors successfully and be prepared to speak with doctors about your loved one’s condition.

If they refuse to go or give every indication that they will imminently harm themselves or others, you may have to call the police and request that they be involuntarily committed. Although the final decision to have someone committed against their will is ultimately the decision of the psychiatrist evaluating them, your words and experiences can have a significant impact on their assessment. Consequently, it is not a decision that you should take lightly. It is an absolute last resort when there are no other options.

In the next post, I will focus on methods of confronting a friend or loved one who may be considering violent acts to others.
$$$
Criminal profiling is a cross between law enforcement and psychology. It is still a relatively new field with few set boundaries or definitions. Practitioners of criminal profiling do not always agree on methodology or even terminology.

Despite their disagreements, however, practitioners of profiling all share a common goal of analyzing evidence gathered at a crime scene and statements provided by victims and witnesses in order to develop a description of an unknown offender. The offender description can include psychological factors such as antisocial personality traits, psychopathologies, behavioral patterns, as well as demographic variables including, age, race and geographic location. 

The FBI system of criminal profiling, which dates back to the 1980s, involves a comprehensive six-step process. As noted by Peter Vronsky in his 2004 book Serial Killers: The Method and Madness of Monsters, each step is critical to the overall system, so the quality of input at each step directly influences the subsequent steps.

Step 1: Profiling Inputs

Step 1 involves the gathering and organizing of all relevant case information. This includes such items as a detailed report on the criminal investigation, crime scene photographs, a description of the neighborhood or area in which the murder occurred, the medical examiner’s report, a timeline of the victim’s movements immediately before death and a detailed background profile of the victim. 

Step 2: Constructing a Decision Process Model

In this step, the fundamental characteristics and details of the homicide are established. These include whether the killing was a serial or single murder, whether homicide was the primary objective of the killer or incidental to another crime, whether the victim was a high-risk individual such as a homeless person or a female sex worker versus a low-risk individual such as a professional, married man. Additional factors used in constructing the decision process model include whether the victim was killed at the scene of the attack or elsewhere and, if elsewhere, the characteristics of the scene where the murder might have occurred. 

Step 3: Crime Assessment

Step 3 of the process is the most involved. In this step, profilers decide whether the crime scene has the characteristics of an organized offender, disorganized offender or a mix of both. The breakthrough idea of classifying serial homicide crime scenes according to an organized/disorganized dichotomy is credited to the late FBI agent and profiler Roy Hazelwood. Profilers use a list of factors such as whether the victim’s body was positioned or posed by the killer, whether sexual acts were performed before or after death and whether cannibalism or mutilation was practiced on the body. These factors are used to predict whether an unknown offender is an organized or disorganized killer. The organized/disorganized classification of offenders is the center piece of the FBI profiling approach and it is explained below.

Organized Offenders

According to the offender and crime scene dichotomy, organized crimes are premeditated and carefully planned, so little evidence is normally found at the scene. Organized criminals, according to the classification scheme, are antisocial but know right from wrong, are not insane and show no remorse.

Based on historical patterns, organized killers are likely to be above average-average intelligence, attractive, married or living with a domestic partner, employed, educated, skilled, orderly, cunning and controlled. They have some degree of social grace, may even be charming, and often talk and seduce their victims into being captured.

With organized offenders, there are typically three separate crime scenes: where the victim was approached by the killer, where the victim was killed, and where the victim’s body was disposed of. Organized killers are very difficult to apprehend because they go to inordinate lengths to cover their tracks and often are forensically savvy, meaning they are familiar with police investigation methods. They are likely to follow the news media reports of their crimes and may even correspond with the news media. Ted Bundy, Joel Rifkin and Dennis Rader are prime examples of organized killers.

article continues after advertisement

Disorganized Offenders

Disorganized crimes, in contrast, are not planned and the criminals typically leave evidence such as fingerprints or blood at the scene of the murder. There is often no attempt to move or otherwise conceal the corpse after the murder. Disorganized criminals may be young, under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or mentally ill. They often have deficient communication and social skills and may be below average in intelligence.

The disorganized offender is likely to come from an unstable or dysfunctional family. Disorganized offenders often have been abused physically or sexually by relatives. They are often sexually inhibited, sexually uninformed and may have sexual aversions or other pathologies. They are more likely than organized criminals to be compulsive masturbators. They are often isolated from others, live alone and are frightened or confused during the commission of their murders. They often do not have reliable transportation, so they kill their victims closer to home than organized offenders.

Significantly, disorganized killers will often “blitz” their victims—that is, use sudden and overwhelming force to assault them. The victim’s body is usually left where the attack took place and the killer makes no attempt to hide it. Jack the Ripper is a classic example of the disorganized serial killer.

It is also important to note that a serial murder case can also be a mix of organized and disorganized. This occasionally occurs, for example, when there are multiple offenders of different personality types involved in the killings. It can also occur when a lone offender is undergoing a psychological transformation throughout his killing career.
$$$
When do we express prejudices toward other groups? Social psychologists suggest that a key factor involves the degree to which the negative attitude in question is considered normative. That is, not all negative attitudes toward groups are considered to be nasty or unacceptable; some are considered normative and even supported (and thus likely to be expressed).

For instance, in a sample of American undergraduates, Crandall and colleagues (2002) found that most people considered it unacceptable to express negative attitudes toward Black and Indigenous populations, and especially unacceptable to be negative toward blind people. However, respondents felt that it is completely acceptable to express negative attitudes toward rapists, child abusers, men who beat their wives, and terrorists. And the correlation between perceived normativity of prejudice and personally held negative attitudes toward a group was r = .96 (that is, almost perfectly correlated)1. We express negative attitudes toward groups when we perceive that it is normative, or socially acceptable, to do so.

This phenomenon has consequences for our current political landscape. Many people feel that President Donald Trump expresses views that are racist and sexist. His political opponents now openly label him as racist. In public polls, most Americans feel that Trump has made racial relations worse, and that he does not do enough to distance himself from white nationalists and disavow prejudice.

Regardless of your own views on his levels of racism or sexism, it is evident that communications that openly disparage marginalized groups have become more common and more frequently expressed lately, even by people of prominence (politicians, business people, celebrities) who ordinarily are considered pillars of the community. Does the normalization of prejudicial attitudes have an effect on hate crimes and acts of sexual violence?

The short answer is arguably “yes”. Consider the following trends in the immediate wake of the 2016 US Presidential election, where racial tensions were openly stoked for political gain, and bragging about the unwanted groping of women was dismissed as mere “locker-room” talk. FBI crime statistics indicate that hate crimes overall jumped 17% in 2017, with some groups particularly targeted (religious-based hate crimes were up 23%; anti-Semitism was up 37%). Shockingly, we have now learned, based on a Pentagon report, that sexual assaults in the military rose 38% from 2016 to 2018.

As a social scientist, I find these figures staggering and jarring. We typically observe much more modest rises and declines in violent crime data. What we are presently experiencing truly is cause for concern. Of course, the causes of such spikes in violence are likely to be complex and multifaceted. But the coarsening of public discourse, and the open refusal by some to distance themselves from prejudicial views, is plain to see and represents a disturbing trend from a psychological perspective. We should not get distracted in debates about whether these prejudicial views cause violence, or whether violence causes prejudicial views, or whether some third unknown variable is causing both to rise. (Those are interesting questions, but largely for social scientists like me to unpack). What is clear is that public norms about civility, and the acceptability of outgroup-disparaging views, have changed radically over the past few years, which has coincided with a staggering rise in behaviour that hurts other groups and risks destabilizing society.

Fortunately, the social psychology literature is also helpful in pointing to solutions. Norms are malleable, as are the perceptions of norms. In a previous column, I have stressed the importance of being anti-racist, not just non-racist.  I argued that norms have a central role to play in mitigating bias, just as they do in fostering bias. Research shows that the presence of a single dissenting voice who expresses anti-racist views induces, in others, less acceptance of prejudice (Blanchard et al., 1994). Other research has shown that people adjust their own racial views to be more aligned with people in their social groups (Stangor et al., 2001). Put simply, if others around you disavow prejudice, you’re more likely to disavow prejudice in turn. Any effort, therefore, to lower the perceived acceptability of racism and sexism is likely to reduce expressions of prejudice in the public domain.
$$$
If you are one of the millions around the world who launched into a personal journey to discover your ancestry, you know how addictive the process can become. With a seemingly unlimited set of familial analyses, based on documents and records alone, it’s possible for you to spend an unlimited amount of time delving into your own family’s history. You can search through the past generations of your own ancestors, those of your partner and his or her own family, and share trees with people you don’t know but with whom you share common familial bonds. You can also validate (or not) claims from your own family members of famous people with distant relationships to you by searching their trees.

In addition to conducting archival research on your family, you can submit a sample of your own DNA into the service’s database to discover your heritage, and also to determine whether people you don’t know, who have also submitted their DNA samples, are related to you or not. Up until a few days ago, most people trusted the results they received from one of the largest family research websites, Ancestry.com. However, at the end of April, everything changed when Ancestry.com revised its DNA algorithm. As reported in the U.K.’s Daily Mail, an “update to its database drastically changes the ethnicity of many users overnight.” People’s lineage shifted, as reported further in CNBC, so that some people became, in the words of one user, “a lot more British.” The outrage over this change in the algorithm suggests that learning your genetic background can alter, for better or worse, your own identity.

The importance that people put on their quest for knowledge of their family roots suggests that the process involves more than academic interest. With the online tools available to learn about your heritage, you now have the ability to gain a deeper sense of your own identity. As much as you might try to define yourself independently from your parents or others in prior generations, there’s a part of you that now can determine exactly where you stand in the ranks of those who preceded you. Whether or not you provide your DNA information to track your heritage, personal traits, and health, you still have the potential to learn about your identity in ways never before possible.

Despite the popularity of these heritage websites, there is little in the academic literature to inform an understanding of the process of self-discovery that these websites support. One intriguing 2015 article by University of Manchester’s Wendy Bottero provides insights into the role of identity in driving people to trace their family genealogy on these websites. In citing some of the earlier studies on the topic, she notes that “popular genealogy performs the task of anchoring a sense of ‘self’ through tracing ancestral connections” … and by promoting “’self-making,’ ‘self-exploration’ and ‘self-understanding’”(pp. 534-535).

Bottero notes that there are many explanations for the popularity of these family history sites, including people’s desires to know their ethnic roots, to compensate for the destabilization of the modern family structure, or just due to a general fascination that people have with family resemblances, traits, and general ‘ways.’ An older relative may have told you that you look just like your great aunt, and now you have the ability to check this out yourself. Similarly, you might have lost family members in wars, sociopolitical events, accidents, or natural disasters, and you want to fill in the gaps of knowledge that you have about these people. 

The process of tracing your family history, whatever the reason, amounts to what Bottero calls “identity work.” Family tree enthusiasts, furthermore, have their own rules of engagement that structure the activities considered appropriate for this particular social activity. You and other website members may feel comfortable communicating only through the messaging service and not directly via email or phone. These norms help to ensure that participants respect the boundaries of others, and as a means to protect the privacy of other family members who do not wish to be a part of your personal search for family identity.

Bottero takes for granted, then, the idea that engaging in family history research is driven in part by the need for self-understanding. Additionally, she observes that when you interact with your past family members by learning the details of their lives, you can put yourself in their places. Quite literally, family history websites give you the “story” of your relatives, including what historical events they were either directly involved in or affected by due to the time and place in which they lived.

To test more explicitly these ideas about family history websites, Bottero used a qualitative approach in which she conducted hourslong interviews with a small set of people, asking them how they conducted their research and what they had found out in the process. She went through their family websites with them in a method she refers to as “family tree elicitation.” Participants told her what was interesting and significant, and also about the range of information they collected as “hinterland” to their stories. In other words, she wanted to learn not what the participants found out about their families, but how they went about the discovery experience.

In part, as Bottero learned, people just enjoy the process of delving through old records and trying to match names with facts as derived from other website members, census information, and any birth, death, or marriage records. Akin to solving a giant crossword puzzle, the search becomes enjoyable in its own right. Thus, Bottero’s respondents enjoyed developing “picturesque cameos” from such newspaper reports as a relative who nearly died in a shipwreck, one whose wedding was attended by F. Scott Fitzgerald, and even the convicts sent from England to Australia to serve out their terms. Participants also enjoyed piecing together the life stories of distant relatives, including whether great-great-great grandparents married more than once, or who might have fathered an illegitimate child. To be able to accomplish these tasks not only provided information about one’s own family members but also became a source of pride regardless of the results. Perhaps you’re the family member who’s decided to do a deep dive into previous generations. You can now gain status in your clan as the one who took the time and effort to uncover long-lost truths.

To sum up, the identity work involved in family genealogy involves the “thrill of the chase,” (p. 551) but also serves to round out your sense of self both in the broad historical context and in the more narrow framework of your slice of that context. Forming a personal narrative of your own life can be fulfilling in and of itself, but as Bottero’s research shows, the process of writing your family’s narrative can inform your larger sense of where you belong in the world.