
This is a large collection of teachings of Sri Aurobindo on various topics.

True quietude is a very great force, a very great strength.

Man becomes God and human activity reaches its highest and noblest when it succeeds in bringing body, heart and mind in touch with spirit.

Desire is the chief enemy of spiritual perfection.

Calmness belongs to the strong.

Man’s greatness is not in what he is but in what he makes possible.

To recognize one’s weakness and to move away from them is the step towards liberation.
A spiritual atmosphere is more important than outer conditions; if one can get that and also create one’s own spiritual air to breathe in and live in it that is the true condition of progress.

All undelight, all pain and suffering are a sign of imperfection, of incompleteness; they arise from a division of being, an incompleteness of consciousness of being, an incompleteness of the force of being. To become complete in being, in consciousness of being, in force of being, in delight of being and to live in this integrated completeness is the divine living.

To be wholly and integrally conscious of oneself and one one’s being is what is implied by the perfect emergence of the individual consciousness, and it is that towards which evolution tends. All being is one, and to be fully conscious means to be integrated with the consciousness of all, with the universal self and force and action.

The Vedic deities represent the various cosmic powers. The Gods are forces of Nature as well as the forces found in the physical body. Anyone who desires to progress spiritually and attain spiritual perfection has to strive towards the development of these Godheads in himself. The external rituals found in the Vedas have a corresponding inner ritual for a spiritual aspirant who wants to elevate himself.

Truth is what the soul has seen and experienced; the rest is appearance, prejudice, and opinion.



A criticism that ignores or belittles the significance of the unsurpassed record and the splendor the self expressing spirit and creative intelligence of the Vedas, stands convicted at one of a blind malignity or an invincible prejudice and does not merit refutation.

By your stumbling, the world is perfected.

We must not only cut asunder the snare of the mind and the senses, but flee also from the snare of the thinker, the snare of theologian and the church-builder, the meshes of the Word and the bondage of the Idea. All these are within us waiting to wall in the spirit with forms; but we must always go beyond, always denounce the lesser the greater, the finite for the Infinite; we must be prepared to proceed from illumination to illumination, from experience to experience, from soul state to soul state… Nor must we attach ourselves even to truths we hold most securely, for they are but forms and expressions of the ineffable who refuses to limit itself to any form or expression.

There are two powers – a fixed and unfailing aspiration that calls from below and a supreme Grace from above that answers – that alone work together in achieving great aims and overcoming difficult things.

But the supreme Grace will act only in the conditions of the Light and the Truth; it will not act in conditions laid upon it by the Falsehood and the Ignorance. For if it were to yield to the demands of the Falsehood, it would defeat its own purpose.

If you open yourself on one side or in one part to the Truth and on another side are constantly opening the gates to hostile forces, it is vain to expect that the divine Grace will abide with you. You must keep the temple (body and mind) clean if you wish to install there the living Presence.

If you learn to live in that calm of the inner being, you will have found your stable basis.

There are two attitudes that a sadhak can have – either a quiet equality to all or a general good will.

A contempt of others is out of place, especially since the Divine is in all.

To discourage anybody is wrong, but to give false encouragement or encouragement of anything wrong is not right.

The absolute is in itself indefinable by reason, ineffable to the speech; it has to be approached through experience.

Action solves the difficulties which action creates. Inaction can only paralyse and delay.

To be in full union with the Divine is the final aim.

The nearer we get to the absolute Ananda, the greater becomes our joy in man and the universe.

The artificiality of much in  human life is the cause of its most deep seated maladies; it is not faithful to itself or sincere with Nature and therefore it stumbles and suffers.

Fear is always a feeling to be rejected, because, what you fear is just the thing that is likely to come to you.

Truth is the foundation of real spirituality and courage is its soul.

Reason and intellectuality cannot make you see the Divine, it is the soul that sees.

The past is our foundation, the present our material and the future our aim and summit.

Faith does not depend upon experience; it is something that is there before experience.

The entire identification of the self with the body is the primary characteristic of complete barbarism.

All birth is a progressive self-finding, a means of self realization.

Bondage and freedom are states of the outer mind not of the inner spirit.

A compromise is a bargain, a transaction of interests between two conflicting powers; it is not a true reconciliation.

Where there is not the personal egoism of the doer, desire becomes impossible.

The artificiality of much in human life is the cause of its most deep seated maladies; it is not faithful to itself or sincere with Nature and therefore it stumbles and suffers.  

For the most part men are the slaves of their associations.

Bondage and freedom are states of the outer mind, not of the inner spirit.

Where there is not the personal egoism of the doer, desire becomes impossible.

In its essentiality all is divine even if the form baffles or repels us.

Be that Fire and that Sun and that Ocean. Be that joy and that greatness and that beauty.

We create our own truth of existence in our own action of mind and life, which is another way of saying that we create our own selves, are our own makers.

The joy of perfect union can come only when what has to be done is done.

The real difficulty is always in ourselves, not in our surroundings.

To have a developed intellect is always helpful if one can enlighten it from above and turn it to a divine use.

What men call knowledge, is the reasoned acceptance of false appearances. Wisdom looks behind the veil and sees.

What the soul sees and has experienced, that it knows; the rest is appearance, prejudice and opinion.

A certain kind of agnosticism is the final truth of all knowledge.

No action, however fast, exhausts the original power from which it proceeds.

The ego of the altruist is as powerful and absorbing as the ego of the selfish and it is often more powerful and insistent because it is a self righteous and magnified ego.

It is for Ananda that the world exists; for joy that the Self puts Himself into the great and serious game of life.

The nearer we get to the absolute Ananda, the greater becomes our joy in man and the universe.

For the most part men are the slaves of their associations.

Love is the only reality and it is not a mere sentiment. It is the ultimate truth that lies at the heart of creation.

Get out of your mind to have the true intelligence.

Spirituality is indeed the master key of the Indian mind; the sense of the infinitive is native to it.

In order to see, you have to stop being in the middle of the picture.

What the soul sees and has experienced, that it knows; the rest is appearance, prejudice and opinion.

The Divine Truth is greater than any religion or creed or scripture or idea or philosophy.

For all problems of existence are essentially problems of harmony.

The soul that can live alone with itself meets God.

Do not belong to the past dawns, but to the noons of future.

True knowledge is not attained by thinking. It is what you are; it is what you become.

It is only the hypocrite and insincere who believe that they are superior to others. Humility is a state of consciousness.

The highest aim of aesthetic being is to find the divine through beauty.

All affinities have to be surrendered to the Divine along with the rest of the old nature, so that only what is in Harmony with the Divine Truth can be kept.

The psychic fire is in the fire of aspiration, purification and Tapasya.

To return to the truth of the Divine now clouded over by Ignorance is the soul’s aim in life.

To be alone with the Divine is the highest of all privileged states for the sadhaka.

The first thing to do in the sadhana is to get a settled peace and silence in the mind. Otherwise you may have experiences, but nothing will be permanent. It is in the silent mind that the true consciousness can be built. A quiet mind does not mean that there will be no thoughts or mental movements at all, but that these will be on the surface and you will feel your true being within separate from them, observing but not carried away, able to watch and judge them and reject all that has to be rejected and to accept and keep to all that is true consciousness and true experience.

One who has not the courage to face patiently and firmly life and its difficulties will never be able to go through the still greater inner difficulties of the sadhana. The very first lesson in this Yoga is to face life and its trials with a quiet mind, a firm courage and an entire reliance on the Divine Shakti. Letters on Yoga, 2 vols (Pondicherry: Aurobindo Ashram, 2013), 2.149–50.

Aspire intensely, but without impatience. … If there are difficulties, stumblings or failures, one has to look at them quietly and call in tranquilly and persistently the Divine help for their removal, but not to allow oneself to be upset or pained or discouraged. Yoga is not an easy path and the total change of the nature cannot be done in a day (Sri Aurobindo, Bases of Yoga 
$$$

Jambavati is one among the Ashta Bharyas or eight principal wives of Sri Krishna. The story of Jambavati becoming the wife of Krishna is associated with the Jewel Syamantaka Mani, or Shamanthakamani. The story of Jambavati is mentioned in the Bhagavata Purana. She was the only daughter of Jambavan – the bear king who assisted Lord Ram in the battle against Ravana. Jambavan is a Chiranjeevi – one bless with eternal life – and was also present when Vishnu took the incarnation of Krishna.

As per Hindu tradition, Satrajit, a vassal king of Dwaraka, received the Syamantaka Mani – a precious stone which ushers in prosperity. Satrajit did not share the wealth received from the precious stone with his people. So Krishna asked Satrajit to allow him to make proper use of the precious as the king of Dwarka. Satrajit declined.

One day, Prasena, brother of Satrajit, went hunting wearing the Syamantaka Mani. A lion killed Prasena. Jambavan who saw this incident killed the lion and retrieved the Syamantaka mani. He then gifted the precious stone to his only daughter, Jambavati.

 

Now Satrajit and other people accused Krishna of killing Prasena for the Syamantaka Mani.

Balram, the eldest brother of Krishna, happened to hear about the scandal. He immediately asked Krishna to find the Syamantaka Mani and clear his name.

Krishna then set out in search of the Mani and tracks it to the cave of Jambavan. But Jambavan refused to return the precious stone. A fight took place between the two and it continued for 21-days. Jambavan used all his magical powers to outwit Sri Krishna but he failed in all his attempts.

Finally, Jambavan realized that Sri Krishna was none other than Lord Ram. He agreed to return the Shamanthakamani and also offered his daughter Jambavati in marriage to Sri Krishna.
$$$

Tirumala Tirupati Balaji Temple is the richest temple in the world. The amount of gold, silver, money and other valuables that offered to Lord Venkateswara (Hindu God Sri Hari Vishnu) the presiding of Tirupati Temple is mind boggling. There are thousands of Sri Vari devotees who start business in partnership with Tirupati Balaji and every year without fail the devotees offer His share of profit at the temple.

There is an interesting story which explains why devotees offer such large amounts of valuable to Tirupati Balaji.

 
Goddess Lakshmi, also referred as Shri, once had a fight with Lord Vishnu and left Vaikunta. She came and settled on earth in disguise.

Lord Vishnu soon arrived on earth searching for Goddess Lakshmi. 

But He failed to trace Shri and settled on Tirumala hills in form of a forest gatherer and continued his search. During the search, Lord Vishnu met a beautiful girl named Padmavati who was the daughter of the King of the seven hills in Tirumala. They both fell in love and decided to get married.

The father of Padmavati asked for a huge bridal price and to pay the money Lord Vishnu took a huge loan from Kubera, the Hindu god who is the treasurer of wealth. But Kubera gave the loan on the condition that Vishnu cannot return to Vaikunta (heavenly abode) without paying off the debt.

So Lord Vishnu resides at Tirumala as Tirupati Venkateswara without returning to Vaikunta. To help him repay his debt, devotees offer him wealth and in return Lord Vishnu fulfills their prayers.
$$$

Gular Tree, also known as Indian fig tree or cluster fig tree, is associated with Shukra Graha. There is a popular belief in Hindu astrology that problems in horoscope or janam kundli due to Shukra Graha (Venus) can solved by the proper use of Gular Tree. The tree is known as atti in Kannada, umaraa in Gujarati, jagna dimaru in Assamese, dimbiri in Odia, aththi in Tamil and Malayalam, medi pandu in Telugu, malaiyin munivan in Tamil, umbar or audumbar in Marathi and jobdumur in Bengali.



How to Overcome Shukra Graha Problems Through Gular?
Sit near a Gular tree and chant ॐ शं शुक्राय नमः (om sham shukraya namah) 108 times.

Get a gular tree sapling on a Friday. Water it and keep it outside the house. Pour water daily to it. You can put some kumkum and uncooked rice under it on every Friday.

Making a locket using a small piece of gular wood and wearing it is considered beneficial in overcoming Shukra related issues.


Plant as many Gular tree as possible and take care of it.
$$$

In Kali Yuga, there is no end to our desires and needs. Unlike other yugas, it is very easy to please the personal deity – unwavering devotion and chanting of mantras are enough. Here is a look at the Ganesh mantra for early promotion.
Ganesh Mantra For Early Promotion
Sri Gajavakram Namo Namah:
श्री गजवकत्रम नमो नम:
How To Chant The Mantra?
The mantra should be chanted continuously for 21 days starting on Tuesday or Chaturthi Tithi (fourth day of a lunar fortnight as per Hindu calendar when the moon is present).
Wake up early in the morning take bath.
The prayer should be performed during sunrise facing the sun.
Keep a murti of Ganesha in the east and offer diya, dhoop, durva grass, flowers, kumkum and modak or fruit.
Chant the mantra 108 times.
Share the modak with family members.
Plant a mango tree and take care of it. 
$$$
As per Hindu astrology, anger and rashi have a direct connection. People born in a particular rashi are known to have a high temper and they are difficult to handle when in anger. Anger management can be based on rashi as per Hindu astrology. Some rashi people forget and forgive quickly. But some people keep anger in mind.

Mesha Rashi – People born in Mesha Rashi are generally known to show a high level of anger, irritability, and rage. This rashi born people get pissed off easily and keep anger in mind. It is better to leave this rashi born people alone when in anger. They will themselves cool down and find solutions to the problems.

Vrishabha Rashi – People born in this rashi will not listen to others when in anger. They are not destructive. But too much pestering might result in self-destruction. This rashi born people do not keep anger in mind.

Mithuna Rashi – People born in this Rashi are more calm and composed. They do not get angry easily. Even if they get angry, it will be within limits. But this rashi people never forgive or forget. So the reason for anger will remain in their mind.

Karka Rashi – People born in this Rashi remain calm but when other people approach them in anger, they do not know how to react. They too get angry and cause problems to self and others. This rashi people will never forgive and will keep anger in mind and take it out in the future.

Simha Rashi – This rashi born person are known to have a high intensity of anger. They do not usually get angry soon but they can be provoked by a certain kind of people and incidents. It is ideal not to get into trouble with Simha Rashi people as in anger they can go to any extent. They will never forget and the anger will remain forever in mind.

Kanya Rashi – This rashi people take small things seriously and get angry. But they do not keep anger in mind. This rashi born people are not generally destructive in anger. But some people might push them so hard that they might end up making wrong decisions in anger.

Tula Rashi – This rashi born people are also known to have a fierce temper. But the positive aspect of this people is that they know how to control their anger. This rashi people have a good control over their anger. This rashi people forgive easily. They do not keep anger in mind.

Vrischika Rashi – This rashi born people are better at anger management. They keep their cool. This people end their anger on their own and do not take it out on others generally. They do not carry anger with them.

Dhanu Rashi – This rashi born people do not get physical in anger but they use very harsh words, which will result in strain in relationships. So this rashi born people should avoid talking and getting into argument in anger. This rashi people too do not keep anger in mind.

Makar Rashi – This rashi born people get angry quickly even on small things. These people make important decisions in life in anger and end up making big mistakes. This rashi never forgive and will carry anger till the end.

Kumbha Rashi – This rashi born people do not show their anger quickly. When in anger, this rashi born people hide it or go away from the scene. This people come out only after everything has settled down. But this people will keep anger in mind and will be cautious in future approaches. They might also start avoiding people who caused anger in them.

Meena Rashi – This rashi born people feel helpless when they are in anger. They cannot carry anger for a long period. They forgive people quickly. But certain people of this Rashi do not know how to react to a situation and might in anger drive harshly or make negative decisions.
$$$

Adi Shankaracharya and Sri Ramanujacharya are two of the most important saints in Hinduism. They are the fountainhead of two different schools of thought that helps devotees in the path of Moksha. Here is a comparison of the teachings of Adi Shankara and Sri Ramanuja. This is just an attempt to learn the teachings of the two of the greatest teachers.

The teaching of Adi Shankaracharya is generally referred as Advaita Philosophy
The teaching of Sri Ramanujacharya is generally referred as Visishtadvaita Philosophy

Adi Shankara teaches Advaita or oneness of God (Brahman)
Sri Ramanuja teaches Visishta Advaita or oneness of God (Brahman) with attributes.

Adi Shankara – Brahman only exists. Manifestations are temporary. They are the result of ignorance. When ignorance is removed there is no second.
Sri Ramanuja – Brahman exists and his manifestations or attributes are real. Attributes (living and non living) are real but are controlled by Brahman.

Adi Shankara – Moksha or liberation is merging with the Brahman
Sri Ramanuja- Moksha or liberation is residing in Vaikunta near the feet of Srihari Vishnu

Adi Shankara – The world is real until knowledge dawns. To a realized soul the world is unreal.
Sri Ramanuja – The world is real and is connected to the Supreme Truth

Adi Shankara – Individual soul is real until knowledge dawns.
Sri Ramanuja– Individual soul arose from the Brahman and remains forever.

Adi Shankara – Soul merges with Brahman. Through self realization one attains bliss.
Sri Ramanuja – Final destination of soul is Vaikunta. This is attained through devotion and self sacrifice.  

Adi Shankara – Pleasure or pain is the result of Avidya. When knowledge dawn one merges in the ocean of bliss (Brahman)
Sri Ramanuja – Pleasure or pain is the result of the karma of the individual soul.
$$$

Jnana Prabodhini in Pune, Maharashtra, offers a one-year course which will train women to become priests (purohits) and rituals associated with Hinduism. There is a great demand for female priests as many families and companies feel that they are more honest and patient in doing rituals and pujas. Another advantage is the communication skill of women priests.

The course is strictly based on Vedic rituals. Nearly 19 pujas and samskaras are taught as part of the one-year course.

The response to the course is great and housewives and young women are joining the course. People from other profession are also joining the course.

Jnana Prabodhini is located at 510, Sadashiv Peth, Pune and concentrates on education and rural development.