An eager crowd of more than 7600 awaited His Holiness the Dalai Lama at the Tsuglagkhang, the Main Tibetan Temple, this morning. They included people from 69 countries among them 429 from India, 254 from Israel, 194 from the USA, 147 from Britain, 137 from Germany as well as the principal group of 1100 from Russia. His Holiness stopped to speak to several people as he walked through the yard. When he reached the temple he greeted Ganden Trisur, Rizong Rinpoché, the incumbent Ganden Tripa and others before taking his seat on the throne.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama arriving at the Main Tibetan Temple for the first day of his teachings requested by Russian Buddhists in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama arriving at the Main Tibetan Temple for the first day of his teachings requested by Russian Buddhists in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
After a recitation of the ‘Heart Sutra’ in Russian, His Holiness addressed the congregation.

“The teaching today is mainly directed to people from Russia, including those from the Buddhist Republics of the Russian Federation, Kalmykia, Buryatia and Tuva, who have a longstanding connection with Tibet. There is a special bond between us.

“Some time ago we would hold teachings for Russians in Delhi. Then some people told me that they couldn’t easily afford to come, so we arranged teachings in Riga, Latvia, that was easier for them to reach. Travelling that far has become difficult for me, so we thought of holding teachings in Delhi again. However, Delhi is hot and the air is polluted so here we are in Dharamsala once more where I hope you will enjoy the clean air and the pleasant weather.

“One of the sutras records the Buddha predicting that his doctrine would travel from north to the north. First of all it spread from India to Tibet and from there to Mongolia and the Buddhist Republics of Russia. Early on, Buddhism was introduced to Tibet from China when King Songtsen Gampo married a Chinese princess who brought the Jowo statue with her. Later, King Trisong Detsen invited Shantarakshita who brought the Nalanda Tradition from India to Tibet.

Some of 1100 Buddhists from Russia following the opening prayers on the first day of His Holiness the Dalai Lama's teaching at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
Some of 1100 Buddhists from Russia following the opening prayers on the first day of His Holiness the Dalai Lama's teaching at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“Two main streams of Buddhism emerged in India, the Pali tradition and the Sanskrit tradition. They both have the practice of monastic discipline, the ethics of the Vinaya, in common. The Nalanda Tradition developed within the Sanskrit tradition emphasizing the study of philosophy and the disciplining of the mind on the basis of reason and logic. Destructive emotions were tackled on the basis of reason, especially the wisdom understanding selflessness—the selflessness of persons and of phenomena. “

“Eventually the Middle Way School (Madhyamaka) asserted that phenomena exist only by way of designation. This and the assertion that things do not exist the way they appear are comparable to the quantum physics’ observation that nothing has any objective existence.”

His Holiness reiterated that the Nalanda Tradition had been conveyed first to Tibet, then to Mongolia and on to the Russian Buddhist Republics. Historically these regions produced thousands of great scholars.

“When I was preparing for my Geshé exam I read many books by such scholars. One of my debating assistants, a scholar from Inner Mongolia called Ngodup Tsognyi, really inspired me to take an interest in the Middle Way view. These days we have several hundred Mongolians studying in the great monasteries in the south of India.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama addressing the audience on the first day of his teachings at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama addressing the audience on the first day of his teachings at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“The Nalanda Tradition makes extensive use of logic in accordance with the Buddha’s advice: ‘As the wise test gold by burning, cutting and rubbing it, So, bhikshus, should you accept my words—after testing them, and not merely out of respect for me.’ The Nalanda Masters subjected the Buddha’s words to logical scrutiny in order to verify them. Only when they were satisfied by reason and experiment did they accept them. The Buddha is the only religious teacher to have encouraged his followers to be sceptical in this way. And this is scepticism is what makes the Nalanda Tradition attractive to scientists.

“Today, in many parts of the world, when it is so much easier to exchange information, more and more people are taking an interest in Buddhism—European Russians as well as traditionally Buddhist Russians. There are also Russian scientists interested in investigating the mind.”

His Holiness repeated advice he often gives that followers of the Buddha today should try to be 21st century Buddhists. He declared that to take refuge in the Three Jewels without understanding is insufficient. Buddhism has unique philosophical points of view, but also teaches the importance of ahimsa or non-violence as a code of conduct. If ahimsa, motivated by karuna or compassion, were more a part of our lives there would be less conflict in the world and we could better address problems like the gap between rich and poor.

Members of the audience attending the first day of His Holiness the Dalai Lama's teaching requested by Russian Buddhists at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
Members of the audience attending the first day of His Holiness the Dalai Lama's teaching requested by Russian Buddhists at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness observed that the classic works of the great Nalanda masters and commentaries to them by Tibetan and Mongolian scholars contain insight and knowledge that could well be studied in an objective, academic way.

“The book I was going to go through with you here is ‘The Changeless Nature’ or Uttaratantra, but it may be too long for the time we have available. It refers to the ‘Tathagatagarbha Sutra’ or the ‘Buddha-nature Sutra’ which was part of the Buddha’s third round of teachings. The second round dealt with the Perfection of Wisdom teachings and in the first round he expounded the Four Noble Truths.

“Gungtang Tenpai Drönmé remarked that the three turnings of the wheel of dharma, or the three rounds of the Buddha’s teachings, are like climbing a mountain, starting at the base and continuing on to the summit. The Perfection of Wisdom teachings of the second round discuss emptiness or the object clear light, but the third round, especially the ‘Tathagatagarbha Sutra’, emphasizes the subjective mind of clear light. We need to learn how to progress along the path according to these three rounds of teachings.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama speaking on the first day of his teachings at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama speaking on the first day of his teachings at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“Soon after his enlightenment the Buddha is said to have expressed his thoughts as follows: ‘Profound and peaceful, free from elaboration, uncompounded clear light, I have found a nectar-like Dharma. Yet if I were to teach it, no-one would understand what I said, so I shall remain silent here in the forest.' We can understand this verse as anticipating the teachings he would eventually give. ‘Profound and peaceful’ refers to the first round of the Buddha’s teachings; ‘free from complexity’ refers to content of the second round, while ‘uncompounded luminosity’ refers to the third round.

“The ‘Tathagatagarbha Sutra’ explains how the clear light mind, ‘uncompounded luminosity’ has existed for beginningless time; it’s always been there. This is also referred to in the Guhyasamaja Tantra and the four empty states, as well as in a commentary to the ‘Mahaparinirvana Sutra’ composed by the Seventh Dalai Lama. This clear light mind is the main subject of the ‘Uttaratantra’ and the seven vajra points with emphasis on the spontaneously arisen mind of clear light.

“It is comparable to what you find in the Nine Vehicles of the Nyingma tradition, the Hearer, Solitary Realizer and Bodhisattva vehicles, the three outer tantras—Kriya, Charya and Yoga tantras and the three inner Tantras—Maha, Anu and Ati Yogas. Mahayoga corresponds to the generation stage, Anuyoga to the completion stage, while Atiyoga takes the basic luminous nature of the mind into the path, as is also described in the Guhyasamajatantra.”

His Holiness the Dalai Lama greeting members of the audience as he leaves at the end of the first day of his teachings at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama greeting members of the audience as he leaves at the end of the first day of his teachings at the Main Tibetan Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 10, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness stopped there for the day and returned to his residence. Yangden Rinpoché taught for the rest of the morning and conducted a session reviewing what His Holiness had said in the afternoon.
$$$
Thekchen Chöling, Dharamsala - In the cool, clear morning air, as the sun rose over the mountains into a cloudless blue sky, His Holiness the Dalai Lama walked from his residence to the Kalachakra Temple early today. Smiling faces, many of them from Russia, greeted him as walked through the garden. He saluted the statue of the Buddha in the main temple before entering the Kalachakra Temple and taking his seat.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama waving to well-wishers gathered to greet him in the Main Tibetan Temple courtyard as he makes his way to the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama waving to well-wishers gathered to greet him in the Main Tibetan Temple courtyard as he makes his way to the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
The Secretary of Namgyal Monastery welcomed everyone to the start of the First Conference on Kalachakra for Scholars of all Tibetan Traditions. Monks of the Monastery sitting in orderly rows chanted verses in praise of the Buddha followed by the Praise to the 17 Masters of Nalanda. Tea and sweet rice were served.
                
“How many scholars have come from elsewhere?” His Holiness wanted to know. The answer was twenty.

“I’ve been quite unwell,” he said. “I came back from Delhi on 8th April feeling fit, but on 9th I was out of sorts, so I returned to Delhi for treatment. It turned out that my illness was not so bad, but I found the treatment tiresome. Now I’m well again, but I need to rest and relax. My staff keep telling me I need to reduce my schedule, so generally I’ll only meet people every other day.”

The Abbot of Namgyal Monastery, Thomtog Rinpoché, who is also Chairman of the Namgyal Monastery Education Society, introduced the occasion. He welcomed His Holiness and Samdhong Rinpoché to this First Conference on Kalachakra. He clarified that the name Shri Kalachakra refers to the union of bliss and emptiness arisen in the form of a deity. Shakyamuni Buddha first taught about this in the form of Kalachakra. The teaching was then taken to Shambhala.

The Abbot of Namgyal Monastery, Thomtog Rinpoché, welcoming His Holiness the Dalai Lama to the First Conference on Kalachakra at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
The Abbot of Namgyal Monastery, Thomtog Rinpoché, welcoming His Holiness the Dalai Lama to the First Conference on Kalachakra at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“Scholars from all Tibetan Buddhist traditions, Nyingma, Sakya, Kagyu, Geluk, Jonang and Butön have written extensively about Kalachakra,” he explained. “The tradition is alive. Jé Tsongkhapa regarded the Kalachakra as an authentic tradition and practised the Six Yogas. Jamyang Chöjé, founder of Drepung Monastery, records that Jé Rinpoché had a vision of Kalachakra. Later, the 7th Dalai Lama, Gyalwa Kalsang Gyatso, composed an extensive sadhana and instigated its practice in Namgyal Monastery. His Holiness the Dalai Lama has given the Kalachakra Empowerment to hundreds of thousands of people around the world. Consequently the complete practice remains intact.

“As followers of Jé Rinpoché it is our responsibility to practise the teachings of the Buddha as he and his followers have done. We regard this conference as an offering of practice.

“In a Prayer he composed for His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s long life called ‘The Melody of the Nectar of Immortality’, Jamyang Khyentsé Chökyi Lodrö referred to him as a human manifestation of Kalachakra:

Kulika Pundarika, skilled and perfect exponent of the Kalachakra,
With its inseparable outer, inner and alternative cycles,
Has appeared in the land of Tibet in the form of a spiritual friend:
You who are in essence the original Buddha, Kalachakra—I pray for your long life!

The Abbot of Namgyal Monastery, Thomtog Rinpoché, speaking at the opening of the First Conference on Kalachakra at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
The Abbot of Namgyal Monastery, Thomtog Rinpoché, speaking at the opening of the First Conference on Kalachakra at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“I too pray that His Holiness may live long, that his propitious wishes may be fulfilled and that the Tibetan people may once again be reunited. May all attain the state of Kalachakra.”

The Principal of the Namgyal Monastery School then outlined the procedure whereby representatives of various traditions, Nyingma, Sakya and Geluk, the Bokar Kagyus, Jonangpas, and a Geshé from Zhalu Monastery, as well as a representative of the Astro Department of the MenTseeKhang will make their presentations over three days.

His Holiness was invited to speak:

“I regularly say how important it is for us to be 21st century Buddhists. In the past in Tibet, people of all three provinces were Buddhist. Even the Bönpos studied Buddhist texts. Buddhism spread right across the land and people placed great faith in rituals and prayers. But what are the true characteristics of the Buddha’s teachings? In India there were the practices of concentration and insight or analysis (shamatha and vipashyana), in addition to which the Buddha taught about causality and dependent arising. He taught how to transform the mind on the basis that a disciplined or calm mind is happy whereas an unruly mind is not.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama addressing the opening session of the First Conference on Kalachakra at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama addressing the opening session of the First Conference on Kalachakra at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“Explanation of the Four Noble Truths with their 16 characteristics and the 37 factors of enlightenment is common to the Foundational and Great Vehicles. They were laid out in the first round of teachings and explained more elaborately in the second.

“Yesterday, I met with some Indian scholars who asked in the course of our conversation why it is that although the harmful effects of smoking are well-established, some people persist in doing it. I suggested that it is because we have different levels of understanding. To start with you may hear or read about something, but you’ll only really begin to understand it if you think about it. Reflection generates a deeper understanding, but only by focussing on what you’ve understood will you reach conviction. At that point you’ll be able to explain to others what you’ve understood on the basis of your own experience. This is why in terms of Buddhist practice we stress the importance of study, critical reflection, and meditative practice.

“We take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha without really knowing what the Buddha is. We need to think about how enlightenment is gained on the basis of the Two Truths, on overcoming the misconception of true existence. All religious traditions teach about love and compassion from different point of view, but the Buddha taught us to use reason and to think about dependent arising. This is how to uproot the causes of suffering. He taught that the more you exercise reason, the more you’ll understand and the deeper your conviction will be. This is what Nagarjuna did and consequently what he wrote attracts the admiration of scientists today.”

Delegates to the First Conference on Kalachakra listening to His Holiness the Dalai Lama at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
Delegates to the First Conference on Kalachakra listening to His Holiness the Dalai Lama at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness noted that there is a practice of maintaining a pure vision of the Lama, but Jé Rinpoché stated that if the Lama teaches something that is at variance with the classical texts, you should challenge it. According to the Nalanda Tradition even the words of the Buddha are subject to analysis. For example, when we come across the Buddha’s advice that the five psycho-physical aggregates are like a load borne by the self, we have to ask why he taught that. The Buddha himself counselled, "As the wise test gold by burning, cutting and rubbing it, so, Bhikshus, should you accept my words—only after testing them and not merely out of respect."

“When I give someone a statue of the Buddha I describe him as a thinker and scientist of ancient India, someone whose teaching can be understood through reason, investigation and experiment—and by setting it against our own experience.

“Here in exile I encouraged nuns to study and to seek the highest qualification, which prompted some surprise among older monks in the monasteries in the South. However, I reminded them that the Buddha offered full ordination equally to monks and nuns, so why should they not also study to the same level? Consequently we now have Geshé-mas and even lay people are showing an interest in study.

“As far as the Kalachakra is concerned, one question that has to be asked,” and His Holiness laughed, “is where is Shambhala? It seems it may not be in this world, but we have to read the texts carefully. I have to admit I sometimes find what is written in the Jataka Tales hard to believe. Maybe some of them exaggerate. However, I don’t have such doubts about what we find in the Heart Sutra—‘Form is empty, but emptiness is form. Emptiness is not other than forms and forms are not other than emptiness.’

Samdhong Rinpoche looks on as His Holiness the Dalai Lama delivers his opening remarks at the First Conference on Kalachakra at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
Samdhong Rinpoche looks on as His Holiness the Dalai Lama delivers his opening remarks at the First Conference on Kalachakra at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“Quantum physicists talk about the observer effect—that the mere observation of a phenomenon inevitably changes that phenomenon. The Mind Only School states that phenomena are the creation of consciousness. The Middle Way School declare that just because something is not found under analysis that doesn’t mean it does not exist; it can still exist in conventional terms.

“Disturbing emotions arise from our exaggerated outlook, our distorted view of reality that conceives of true existence.

“If we can explain the Buddha’s teachings in terms of the ground reality and the path that culminates in the resultant state they will survive for centuries.”
As far as the Kalachakra tradition is concerned, His Holiness stated that the monks of Jonang Monastery and the followers of Butön Rinpoché were the main upholders of the tradition. In Tibet, Panchen Palden Yeshé was said to have visited Shambhala and brought a huge grain back to Tashi Lhunpo. There were Indian masters who did not accept the Kalachakra tradition and it seems Rendawa did not either. His Holiness emphasised that it’s necessary to study and put what you understand into practice and see whether you have a genuine experience.

With regard to the Six Branch Practice of Kalachakra, the Jonangpas still maintain the practices for day and night and gain the signs in relation to them. His Holiness mentioned a special practice for fixing the gaze on the mid-brow that Kalu Rinpoché showed him. He alluded to the practice of bliss and empty-form in relation to Kalachakra, as well as the four empty states of which the fourth is the empty state of clear light. He recalled that where the Buddha’s second round of teachings explains in detail about cessation, in the third round he spoke of the mind of clear light.

Delegates to the First Conference on Kalachakra listening to His Holiness the Dalai Lama at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
Delegates to the First Conference on Kalachakra listening to His Holiness the Dalai Lama at the Kalachakra Temple in Dharamsala, HP, India on May 5, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
Finally, His Holiness remarked that whereas some people claim that building temples and monasteries amounts to building the Dharma, Vasubandhu was straightforward in stating that the survival of the Buddha’s teaching depends on study and practice.

“It’s one thing to study the scriptural teaching, but it has to be augmented by realization within yourself. That’s the only way to ensure the teaching will survive—keep up what you’re doing and explain this to others.”

His Holiness was escorted from the temple by the Abbot and Disciplinarian of Namgyal Monastery. At the bottom of the temple steps he climbed into a car and drove back to his residence.
$$$
Thekchen Chöling, Dharamsala, HP, India - His Holiness the Dalai Lama has written to congratulate Emperor Naruhito on his accession to the throne of Japan and the dawning of the new Reiwa era.

“I warmly admire Your Majesty’s determination,” he wrote, “to continue your respected father’s, the Emperor Emeritus's, compassionate approach of interacting closely with the public, while fulfilling the responsibility of Symbol of the State.

“I have profound respect for the resilience of the people of Japan,” he continued, “and for the way the nation rose up again from the ashes of World War II. In subsequent years too, Japan has faced unprecedented, natural disasters but has recovered thanks to a combination of hard work and strength of spirit. I have seen this with my own eyes when I had the opportunity to visit areas struck by the devastating earthquake and the tsunami of 2011. I met there with people affected by these calamities and we prayed together for those members of the community who had lost their lives.

“Over the last fifty years or so, during regular visits to Japan, I have deeply appreciated the interest and enthusiasm that people from all walks of life have shown in my efforts to encourage the cultivation of such fundamental human values as compassion and religious harmony.”

His Holiness concluded with a prayer that His Majesty's reign will be successful, that the people will be happy, and that the new era will contribute to a more peaceful, compassionate world.
$$$
New Delhi, India - When American philanthropist Bobby Sager first met His Holiness the Dalai Lama 19 years ago he asked for a project to undertake and His Holiness suggested he help facilitate science education in Tibetan monasteries. This morning they met again when Sager accompanied 47 Youth Global Leaders to meet him.

American philanthropist Bobby Sager introducing His Holiness the Dalai Lama at the start of his meeting with Youth Global Leaders in New Delhi, India on April 7, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
American philanthropist Bobby Sager introducing His Holiness the Dalai Lama at the start of his meeting with Youth Global Leaders in New Delhi, India on April 7, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
Addressing them as respected brothers and sisters, His Holiness told them he was honoured to meet people committed to the common goal of human happiness.

“Yesterday, I mentioned that things change. It’s part of nature. Things that are bad don’t stay that way, but neither do things that are good. Things change due to the causes that brought them about, as well as other factors. No matter how serious things are, if we use our intelligence and think properly about them, not letting our intelligence come under the sway of our destructive emotions, our intelligence has the ability to see reality. When emotions interfere, we see only one aspect. When our minds are calm, our intelligence can see the whole reality.

“I am just one of the 7 billion human beings alive today and as such I try to promote human compassion based on a sense that all human beings are one. This way of thinking is of immense benefit to me. When I meet someone, with two eyes, one nose and so forth, I recognise them as physically, mentally and emotionally the same as me. I feel they are my sister or brother.

“As a Buddhist monk, I feel a responsibility to promote religious harmony. Killing each other in the name of religion, as we see these days, is unthinkable. All religious traditions convey a message of love, taking different approaches to suit people’s different dispositions. Their aim is for people to become more honest and more truthful. In India we see harmony prevail among all the religious traditions that flourish here. I’ve never heard, for example, of conflict between Sunnis and Shias in this country and in June Indian Muslims are convening a meeting to make that clear.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama addressing members of Youth Global Leaders in New Delhi, India on April 7, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama addressing members of Youth Global Leaders in New Delhi, India on April 7, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“I’m also a Tibetan, someone in whom the Tibetan people place their hope. But as far as political responsibility is concerned, I retired in 2001. Since I was a child, I’ve been aware that leaving all power in the hands of a regent or the Dalai Lama was wrong. After I accepted political responsibility in 1950 I set up a reform committee, but its success was limited because the Chinese wanted any changes that were made to be done their way. In 1960, after we arrived in India, we started to work to establish a democratic system and our first entirely elected leadership was achieved in 2001.

“Meanwhile, I speak up for the protection of the Tibetan environment, which, because so many great rivers rise on the Tibetan plateau, is important to the peoples of South and South-east Asia. But what most concerns me is the preservation of Tibetan culture, which essentially preserves the Indian Nalanda Tradition established in Tibet in the 8th century at the behest of the Tibetan King, Trisong Detsen. We have kept this tradition, with its focus on philosophy, psychology and logic, alive for more than one thousand years. This is an approach not found in other Buddhist countries.

“The 13th century Tibetan master, Sakya Pandita wrote about logic and we Tibetans studied this and the works of Dignaga and Dharmakirti. I attribute my present sharpness of mind to my training in logic.

“I am committed to trying to revive ancient Indian knowledge in modern India, because I believe this is the only country that could combine this learning with modern education. In the monastic universities re-established in South India we have about 10,000 monks and 1000 nuns trained in this age-old understanding of the workings of the mind and emotions.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama using his rosary to explain a point during his talk to Youth Global Leaders in New Delhi, India on April 7, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama using his rosary to explain a point during his talk to Youth Global Leaders in New Delhi, India on April 7, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“Science as we know it was not studied at Nalanda, but today it has assumed a great significance. Meetings between scientists and Tibetan Buddhist scholars and practitioners have been mutually beneficial. The Buddha taught two truths, conventional and ultimate truth, that scientists accept. Within the more than 300 volumes of translated Buddhist literature there is much more that scientists find of interest.”

When a member of the audience mentioned karma in her question, His Holiness responded that to blame what happens on karma, as if nothing can be done about it, is a lazy attitude. He told her, we should ask who makes this karma—the answer is, we do.

“Even if we’ve made bad karma, we can change it by creating good karma. We tend to make problems by being short-sighted. Human beings have a marvellous intelligence that enables us to change as a result of education. We need to look at things from different angles. We understand things by taking a scientific approach and investigating and analysing how they arise. People adopt different philosophical viewpoints because of their different dispositions. Even within Buddhism there are an array of philosophical point of view.

“These days, in democratic societies, people have a right to choose what religious tradition to follow. We can’t say that Buddhism or any other tradition is best any more than we can say that a particular medicine is the best.”

A member of the audience asking His Holiness a question during his meeting with Youth Global Leaders in New Delhi, India on April 7, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
A member of the audience asking His Holiness a question during his meeting with Youth Global Leaders in New Delhi, India on April 7, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness was asked about artificial intelligence and he replied that there are many applications in which it is very helpful. However, since artificial intelligence is ultimately created by human intelligence he doesn’t envisage it taking over as some people fear. Consciousness is not limited to sensory functions; mental consciousness is sophisticated, subtle and powerful.

Finally, His Holiness was asked how to nurture kindness and gentleness.

“We can strengthen and enhance natural human qualities like these through education and training so that ultimately we develop the altruistic awakening mind of bodhichitta. As Shantideva writes in his ‘Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life’:

“Whatever joy there is in this world
All comes from desiring others to be happy,
And whatever suffering there is in this world
All comes from desiring myself to be happy.

“If I do not actually exchange my happiness
For the sufferings of others,
I shall not attain the state of Buddhahood
And even in cyclic existence shall have no joy.

“Altruism is the ultimate source of happiness; self-centredness only yields anxiety and stress. Think of enemies as potentially your friends; think of all 7 billion human beings as part of one community.”
$$$
A group of eighty-five people from Singapore, including Singaporeans, Americans, Australians, Britishers, Indians, Canadians, Chinese, French, Swiss and several from other countries, came to visit His Holiness the Dalai Lama this morning. They were all members of Club 1880 who are motivated by a wish to change the world, one conversation at a time.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama greeting one of the younger members of a group from Singapore on his arrival for the meeting at his residence in Dharamsala, HP, India on March 27, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama greeting one of the younger members of a group from Singapore on his arrival for the meeting at his residence in Dharamsala, HP, India on March 27, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness greeted them all as he walked into the room, but paid particular attention to the children in the front row. He suggested that if people like them, belonging to the 21st century, made an effort to change things through education, after one generation or so, they might see a more peaceful, more compassionate world emerge.

Marc Nicholson introduced the group as people from different backgrounds and of different faiths united by the hope to make the world a better place.

“Among the 85 of you here and even among all 7 billion human beings everyone has a different face,” His Holiness responded. “And yet we were all born the same way.

“Since my childhood, I’ve been learning how to tackle my emotions. Sometimes life has been difficult, but I’ve learned that what really helps is being able to maintain peace of mind. According to the Buddhist concept, it is the nature of samsara, the world in which we live, to be full of problems. But faced with such problems it’s always better if you can keep your peace of mind. One way to do this is to cultivate the awakening mind of bodhichitta, to have concern for others and to remember their kindness. I regard my fellow beings as wanting a joyful life as I do and generate warm-heartedness towards them on a daily basis. We all have Buddha nature and if you think of others as being like you, it’s easy to feel close to whoever you meet.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama speaking to members of Club 1880 from Singapore at his residence in Dharamsala, HP, India on March 27, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama speaking to members of Club 1880 from Singapore at his residence in Dharamsala, HP, India on March 27, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“Whether we are religious or not, we can all benefit from cultivating warm-heartedness. I’ve noticed that those who are more compassionate tend to be more peaceful. If that’s how you are, even when you receive bad news, it doesn’t upset or irritate you. To maintain peace of mind, we need to tackle our disturbing emotions. Just as we learn to look after our physical health, we have to learn to look after our minds too. If you’re physically fit, but your mind is distressed, you’ll be unhappy. Alongside physical hygiene I recommend we cultivate emotional hygiene as well.

“We are social animals. We depend on the community in which we live. Our survival and our very happiness depend on our families, neighbours and so forth. These days the whole world is like one community. We share in a global economy, but we also face the challenge of climate change together. We have to consider the welfare of all 7 billion human beings.

“No one wants problems and although we are at peace with each other here, elsewhere, right now, are people afflicted with all kinds of trouble, including violence in the name of religion. Much better than that is to live in peace with your neighbours. That’s why, as a human being, I’m committed to promoting compassion as a true source of happiness.”

His Holiness mentioned his commitment to encouraging religious harmony because all religious traditions, whatever their philosophical point of view, convey a message of love. Some believe they and the world are created by God, others believe that everything depends on our own actions. In India, where there is a long-standing tradition of ahimsa or non-violence motivated by compassion, he said, we can see religious harmony in action.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama recalling a humorous story during his conversation with members of Club 1880 from Singapore at his residence in Dharamsala, HP, India on March 27, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness the Dalai Lama recalling a humorous story during his conversation with members of Club 1880 from Singapore at his residence in Dharamsala, HP, India on March 27, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
“Thirdly,” he continued, “I’m a Tibetan with the name Dalai Lama and six million Tibetans place their trust in me. Although I’ve been retired from political responsibility since 2001, I remain concerned to preserve Tibetan culture.

“Tang historians record that in the 7th century there were three neighbouring kingdoms, China, Mongolia and Tibet. The Tibetan king married a Chinese princess who contributed to introducing Buddhism to Tibet. However, he chose the Indian Devanagari script as the model for Tibetan writing. In the 8th century, despite his mother being Chinese, the Tibetan king looked to India to learn more about Buddhism. He invited the great scholar Shantarakshita to Tibet where he introduced the traditions of Nalanda University that we have kept alive for more than a thousand years.

“Nowadays, the Nalanda Tradition is really only upheld among Tibetans. Since Shantarakshita encouraged the translation of Sanskrit Buddhist literature into Tibetan, the language was so enriched that it is now the medium best suited to accurately expressing Buddhist philosophy.

“In the past, Tibet was independent, but the world has changed and these days I admire the spirit of the European Union that places common interest above narrower national concerns. We earlier raised the issue of Tibet at the UN, but since 1974 decided no longer to push for independence. What we seek are the rights for Tibetan autonomous regions mentioned in the Chinese constitution, including the right to preserve our culture and language.”

A member of the audience asking His Holiness the Dalai Lama a question during his conversation with members of Club 1880 from Singapore at his residence in Dharamsala, HP, India on March 27, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
A member of the audience asking His Holiness the Dalai Lama a question during his conversation with members of Club 1880 from Singapore at his residence in Dharamsala, HP, India on March 27, 2019. Photo by Tenzin Choejor
His Holiness invited questions and a boy at the front wanted to know what it’s like to be a reincarnation. His Holiness laughed and answered, “Nothing special. I’m a normal human being.”

Asked how to relate to emptiness His Holiness confirmed that this is a key Buddhist concept. When Nagarjuna explained it, he stressed that emptiness does not mean nothingness, it means that things do not exist the way they appear. Things do not exist independently, they are merely designated. Everything is dependent on other factors, including the mind that is not something physical, but exists as a continuity of moments of consciousness.

With regard to compassion His Holiness explained that scientists assert that basic human nature is compassionate. He pointed out that young children care little for differences among them, they are simply happy to play together. It’s only as they grow older and begin their education that they learn to observe distinctions. He suggested that modern education would do well to pay more attention to inner values, encouraging children to cultivate and enhance their natural sense of warm-heartedness.

“We are social animals,” His Holiness declared. “Our future and happiness depend on those around us. Over-emphasising secondary differences only leads to trouble. Much better to remember how we’re all the same in being human and work together to fulfil the common good.”

There were words of thanks from the visitors, after which His Holiness remarked, “Every day I dedicate my body, speech and mind to the welfare of others, so I’m happy if it may have been of benefit to share my thoughts with you.”