 What's a Christian Worldview?

By Del Tackett
	
Pinterest
	
0
	
Email
	

Part of the What's a Christian Worldview Series

    What's a Christian Worldview?
    What's Your View of the World?
    What's Your Worldview?

Series About:

Christian Worldview

A recent nationwide survey completed by the Barna Research Group determined that only 4 percent of Americans had a "biblical" worldview. When George Barna, who has researched cultural trends and the Christian Church since 1984, looked at the "born- again" believers in America, the results were a dismal 9 percent.

Barna's survey also connected an individual's worldview with his or her moral beliefs and actions. Barna says, "Although most people own a Bible and know some of its content, our research found that most Americans have little idea how to integrate core biblical principles to form a unified and meaningful response to the challenges and opportunities of life."

1. What's a worldview?

A worldview is the framework from which we view reality and make sense of life and the world. "[It's] any ideology, philosophy, theology, movement or religion that provides an overarching approach to understanding God, the world and man's relations to God and the world," says David Noebel, author of Understanding the Times.

For example, a 2-year-old believes he's the center of his world, a secular humanist believes that the material world is all that exists, and a Buddhist believes he can be liberated from suffering by self-purification.

Someone with a biblical worldview believes his primary reason for existence is to love and serve God.

Whether conscious or subconscious, every person has some type of worldview. A personal worldview is a combination of all you believe to be true, and what you believe becomes the driving force behind every emotion, decision and action. Therefore, it affects your response to every area of life: from philosophy to science, theology and anthropology to economics, law, politics, art and social order — everything.

For example, let's suppose you have bought the idea that beauty is in the eye of the beholder (secular relative truth) as opposed to beauty as defined by God's purity and creativity (absolute truth). Then any art piece, no matter how vulgar or abstract, would be considered "art," a creation of beauty.

2. What's a biblical worldview?

A biblical worldview is based on the infallible Word of God. When you believe the Bible is entirely true, then you allow it to be the foundation of everything you say and do. That means, for instance, you take seriously the mandate in Romans 13 to honor the governing authorities by researching the candidates and issues, making voting a priority.

Do you have a biblical worldview? Answer the following questions, based on claims found in the Bible and which George Barna used in his survey:

    Do absolute moral truths exist?
    Is absolute truth defined by the Bible?
    Did Jesus Christ live a sinless life?
    Is God the all-powerful and all-knowing Creator of the universe, and does He still rule it today?
    Is salvation a gift from God that cannot be earned?
    Is Satan real?
    Does a Christian have a responsibility to share his or her faith in Christ with other people?
    Is the Bible accurate in all of its teachings?

Did you answer yes to these? Only 9 percent of "born- again" believers did. But what's more important than your yes to these questions is whether your life shows it. Granted, we are all sinners and fall short, but most of our gut reactions will reflect what we deep-down, honest-to-goodness believe to be real and true.

3. How does a biblical worldview get diluted?

Here is the big problem. Nonbiblical worldview ideas don't just sit in a book somewhere waiting for people to examine them. They bombard us constantly from television, film, music, newspapers, magazines, books and academia.

Because we live in a selfish, fallen world, these ideas seductively appeal to the desires of our flesh, and we often end up incorporating them into our personal worldview. Sadly, we often do this without even knowing it.

For example, most Christians would agree with 1 Thessalonians 4:3 and other Scriptures that command us to avoid sexual immorality, but how often do Christians fall into lust or premarital and extramarital sexual sin? Is it simply because they are weak when tempted, or did it begin much earlier, with the seductive lies from our sexualized society?

4. Why does a biblical worldview matter?

If we don't really believe the truth of God and live it, then our witness will be confusing and misleading. Most of us go through life not recognizing that our personal worldviews have been deeply affected by the world. Through the media and other influences, the secularized American view of history, law, politics, science, God and man affects our thinking more than we realize. We then are taken "captive through hollow and deceptive philosophy, which depends on human tradition and the basic principles of this world rather than on Christ" (Colossians 2:8).

However, by diligently learning, applying and trusting God’s truths in every area of our lives — whether it's watching a movie, communicating with our spouses, raising our children or working at the office — we can begin to develop a deep comprehensive faith that will stand against the unrelenting tide of our culture's nonbiblical ideas. If we capture and embrace more of God's worldview and trust it with unwavering faith, then we begin to make the right decisions and form the appropriate responses to questions on abortion, same- sex marriage, cloning, stem-cell research and even media choices. Because, in the end, it is our decisions and actions that reveal what we really believe.

"Do not conform any longer to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind" (Romans 12:2).

    Our first priority in family ministry should be to introduce people to the author of family — He is the greatest hope for healthy, thriving families. We believe that parents should aspire to model for their children how to humbly follow the teachings and spirit of Jesus at home and in the community.

$$$
We use cookies to improve your experience of our website. For more information on how this website uses cookies and instructions on how to disable them, please click here to view our Cookie Policy. By continuing to use this website, you are consenting to the website's use of cookies.
Got It!
Home

Español Français

Facebook iconTwitter iconYouTube icon

    CONNECT
        ABOUT COMMENTS ORDER FREE DONATIONS 
    READ
        BIBLE STUDY COURSE BOOKLETS COMMENTARY MAGAZINE 
    WATCH
        TELECAST TV LOG TWNOW VIEWPOINT 

    Home Read Booklets The Bible: Fact or Fiction?

The Bible: Fact or Fiction?
Douglas S. Winnail
Comment on this Booklet

Audio Player
00:00
00:00
Use Up/Down Arrow keys to increase or decrease volume.
Download Audio MP3

    Is the Bible just a collection of myths and legends, or is it the inspired word of God? Many assume that modern scholarship has discredited the Bible, but the facts of history — and the discoveries of archaeology — confirm its contents to be true! The Bible recounts the past with amazing accuracy — and it predicts the future like no other book! Most of the world has been misled and misinformed about the Bible. You need to understand the truth — and how it can affect your life!

Chapter 1
What Do You Believe About the Bible?

Is the Bible really the inspired word of God? Was it accurately preserved for thousands of years as a unique revelation from the Creator of the universe? Or is it just a collection of humanly devised myths and fables? Do we even have the right books in the Bible, or are important sources missing that would change our view of God, Jesus Christ and Christianity? Can we trust Scripture? Is the Bible vital and relevant today?

Discovering the truth about the Bible could prove to be one of the most important and exciting adventures you have ever embarked upon. Although critics attack the Bible, and preachers ignore or gloss over many of its teachings, the Bible contains a dimension of knowledge that is almost totally missing from our modern world. The Bible reveals the true purpose of life. Bible prophecies not only foretold the rise and fall of ancient nations; they also explain the real significance of world events making headlines today and where those events are heading. In spite of what millions have been led to believe, the Bible is much more than a pious devotional book or an incense-shrouded source of comfort for the troubled and bereaved!

Today, many educated people assume that science and modern scholarship have thoroughly discredited the Bible. This assumption thrives because so many know so little about the Bible. Many people today are simply unaware of discoveries that continue to confirm the historical accuracy of Scripture. Instead, people are encouraged to believe that all religions are equally credible—or equally fanciful—without ever comparing the sourcebooks of those religions. As a result, millions are unaware of how the Bible is unique, and what amazing features distinguish it from all other religious books.

Before you accept the idea that the Bible is "just like any other book," you need to examine the evidence for yourself. That evidence is eye-opening and extremely informative, and it could change your life! You need to understand why so many today doubt the Bible's credibility, and what the truth about the Bible can mean to your future.
A Change in Attitude

For thousands of years, Jews and Christians believed, and died for believing, that the Bible was the inspired word of an Almighty God. Down through the ages, antagonists and skeptics have challenged, attacked and ridiculed the Bible. Popes and pagan Roman emperors attempted to destroy Scripture, and even altered its words. Yet, during these same turbulent centuries, the Bible was carefully preserved and its message spread in remarkable ways!

The Bible is surely the most influential book ever written. It has been translated into more languages than any other piece of literature. More than two billion people alive today embrace, at least nominally, its teachings. Even so, many do not realize how profoundly the Bible has influenced the course of all Western civilization. Millions do not understand that biblical laws and teachings provided the basis for social values and legal systems throughout the Western world for centuries. Sir Isaac Newton, one of the most brilliant minds of his century, remarked, "There are more sure marks of authenticity in the Bible than in any profane history." Britain's Queen Victoria said of the Bible, "That book accounts for the supremacy of England." U.S. president Andrew Jackson stated, "That book, sir, is the rock on which our republic stands." U.S. president George Washington commented, "It is impossible to govern the world without God and the Bible." France's Napoleon observed, "The Bible is no mere book, but a Living Creature, with a power that conquers all who oppose it" (Halley's Bible Handbook, pp. 18–19).

Yet much has changed since these statements were made. Today, Bibles can be found in far-flung corners of the globe. But in Western nations founded on biblical principles, there has been a steep decline in respect for the Bible. There is a pervading notion that the Bible is just another book, and that its teachings are archaic, outdated and irrelevant to our modern lives. Many seriously doubt that God inspired Scripture. Millions who live in nations that once learned to read from the Bible, and sent Bible-toting missionaries around the world, cannot even name books in the Bible or explain basic biblical doctrines. Surveys done in recent decades show that even many professing Christians have little real knowledge about the Bible. Coinage in the U.S. proclaims, "In God We Trust." Yet recent legislation and judicial decisions have made it illegal in the U.S. to display the Ten Commandments in public buildings, or for students to pray in school!

What has produced such a profound shift in attitudes toward the Bible in the very nations that once professed strong belief in Scripture? Why do millions now doubt that God inspired the Bible? Why are billions searching everywhere else for answers found clearly in the Bible? Why do people fail to recognize that the Bible contains prophecies clearly revealing the course of world history, and even the future of specific nations? Why have modern generations chosen to ignore a book that reveals essential details about the future and explains the way to peace and the ultimate purpose for human existence? Why has such vital information remained hidden from so many today?

The answers to these important questions read like a novel laced with danger, intrigue and adventure. You will be surprised by information about the Bible that is readily available, yet has largely gone unappreciated or been ignored. You will be shocked to learn how power-seeking religious leaders have twisted Scripture to support misguided and anti-biblical doctrines.

The more you learn about Scripture, the more you will realize that you can believe the Bible, because it has been inspired and preserved by a real God who is alive today! The Bible is firmly based on the facts of history, not on myth and fiction. The evidence presented in this booklet will make this clear.
The Challenge of Scripture

Many today assume that to believe the Bible, you must ignore the facts of science and history and just proceed on "blind faith." Some believers relish the old saying, "God said it. I believe it. That settles it"—but this does not fit well with the skepticism that dominates our age. Others want to ignore what Scripture plainly states, and invent ways to "harmonize" the Bible with modern preferences. Many theologians teach that the Bible is only authoritative when it speaks of broad spiritual principles, and suggest that details of science or history in Scripture are merely the untrustworthy additions of human writers.

This desire to accommodate the Bible to the modern world is reflected in an October 2005 document issued by Roman Catholic bishops from England, Scotland and Wales. In "The Gift of Scripture," the bishops warned that while they consider the Bible true in passages regarding salvation, "we should not expect total accuracy from the Bible in other matters… We should not expect to find in Scripture full scientific accuracy or complete historical accuracy." Even so, the bishops profess respect for Scripture, telling their flock: "We have rediscovered the Bible as a precious treasure, both ancient and ever new." These double-minded statements reflect the mindset of many theologians today, who say they respect the Bible but deny its authority. When religious leaders urge people to believe in a book that cannot be trusted on many topics, it is not surprising that church attendance in many countries has fallen off dramatically in recent decades.

The plain teachings of the Bible, however, stand in striking contrast to what many religious leaders preach today. The Apostle Paul did not encourage first century Christians to "just believe" in Jesus and merely accept the teachings of the Bible and Christianity "on faith." Instead, he told his audiences, "Test all things; hold fast what is good" (1 Thessalonians 5:21). Paul urged people to check into the facts and believe what they could prove to be true! His admonition reflects Old Testament passages where God challenged the ancient Israelites to "prove Me now… if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it" (Malachi 3:8–10, KJV). God urged Israel to put His promises to the test, and promised that He would bless them, to prove that He was real and that His promises were true! Paul knew that true religious belief involves evidence, assurance and certainty, not "blind faith." He wrote that "faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen" (Hebrews 11:1). According to the Bible, faith should rest on solid evidence, not just warm, fuzzy, emotional feelings in your heart. You should never believe something in spite of the facts, and that includes believing in the authenticity and authority of the Bible!

The Apostle Peter emphasized the credibility of Scripture and of the Christian message when he wrote: "For we did not follow cunningly devised fables when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of His majesty" (2 Peter 1:16). Peter also warned his readers to "be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets" because "scoffers will come in the last days" questioning and ridiculing Scripture, "saying, 'where is the promise of His coming?'" (2 Peter 3:1–9). Peter challenged prevailing misconceptions about Scripture; he did not try to water down fundamental scriptural teaching.

The Bible clearly reveals that the apostolic writers were advocates of Scripture, and of the teachings of the Christian faith! They knew that they were preaching the truth! Their approach followed the example of their teacher, Jesus Christ. The New Testament shows that Christ's manner of preaching surprised His audiences. "And so it was, when Jesus had ended these sayings, that the people were astonished at His teaching, for He taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes" (Matthew 7:28–29).

The contents of Scripture can be verified by the facts of history and the discoveries of modern science and archaeology. What is more, the Bible provides answers to life's big questions. Not only do the hundreds of detailed Bible prophecies accurately reveal the future course of world events; they set the Bible apart from all other religious books! The Bible provides a dimension of knowledge that is simply not available from any other source.

With so much evidence available, the real question that we face today is simply whether or not we can believe the Bible. As you read this booklet, you will see that the answer is, "Yes, we can!"
Chapter 2
Prophecy: The Bible's Unique Dimension

Many assume that all religions are equally credible, that religious people all worship the same God and that the holy books of various religions are of equal value. Yet nothing could be further from the truth! Scholars confidently claim that no one can predict the future with assurance—and that only fools try! However, these assertions overlook or ignore the incredible phenomenon of Bible prophecy, which distinguishes the Bible from any other book that has ever been written.

The God of the Bible claims that He can predict the future and bring it to pass! The Bible contains hundreds of prophecies that have come true, and are confirmed by history. The Bible also contains dozens of prophecies that are coming alive today! Bible prophecies explain the real significance of global events making headlines today. Bible prophecies also reveal what is ahead for major nations of our modern world—and for the human race! No other book, religious or secular, does this with such accuracy and detail! Prophecy is clearly the Bible's most striking feature!

Notice this amazing statement by Dr. Gleason Archer, a renowned Old Testament scholar: "The Holy Bible is like no other book in all the world. It is the only book which represents itself as the written revelation of the one true God, intended for the salvation of man, and demonstrating its divine authority by many infallible proofs. Other religious documents, such as the Muhammadan Koran, may claim to be the very word of God, but they contain no such self-authenticating proofs as does the Bible (for example, the phenomena of fulfilled prophecy)" (A Survey of Old Testament Introduction, Archer, p. 9).

Another authoritative source notes: "One of the strongest evidences that the Bible is inspired by God is its predictive prophecy. Unlike any other book, the Bible offers a multitude of specific predictions—some hundreds of years in advance—that have been literally fulfilled or else point to a definite future time when they will come true" (Geisler, p. 609). Old Testament professor Milton C. Fisher recognizes a "sharp distinction between prophetism in Israel and the outwardly similar phenomenon in surrounding cultures… both the type of message and the writings of Israel's prophets is without parallel" (The Origin of the Bible, Bruce, pp. 105–106). Another scholar has noted that "the Bible… is the most remarkable volume that has ever been produced in some five thousand years… it is the only volume that has ever been produced by men, or a group of men, in which is to be found a large body of prophecies relating to individual nations, to Israel, to all the peoples of the earth, to certain cities, and to the coming One who was to be the Messiah. The ancient world had many different devices for determining the future, known as divination, but not in the entire gamut of Greek and Latin literature… can we find any real specific prophecy of a great historic event to come in the distant future, nor any prophecy of a Savior to arise in the human race" (Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, p. 22). These are absolutely remarkable statements that clearly recognize the unique nature of Bible prophecy!
The Challenge of Prophecy

Being able to predict the future accurately and consistently is simply not a human trait. Even the best strategic planners acknowledge that detailed prediction of future events—especially geopolitical events—is difficult in the short term, and practically impossible in the long term, at least at any level of detail. Yet the Bible repeatedly predicts the rise and fall of prominent individuals, nations and empires with amazing accuracy and in remarkable detail! Bible scholars have determined that more than one quarter of the Bible—about 27 percent—is devoted to prophecy, and that the Bible contains more than 1,800 predictions, many of which are very specific. Hundreds of specific prophecies, given centuries before their exact fulfillment, are undeniable evidence that an all-powerful God is alive and in control of future events!

Scripture makes this plain when the God of the Bible challenges skeptics to predict the future and bring it to pass! Through the pen of the prophet Isaiah, God thunders: "Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that you are gods… indeed you are nothing, and your work is nothing; he who chooses you is an abomination" (Isaiah 41:23–24). And again: "Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is none like Me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times things that are not yet done, saying, 'My counsel shall stand, and I will do my pleasure'" (Isaiah 46:9–10). These verses boldly state that no human being can predict the future and bring it to pass on the scale that the God of the Bible claims He can—and has, and will!

This unique capacity to predict the future accurately sets the Bible apart from any other piece of literature. Bible scholars recognize: "Other books claim divine inspiration, such as the Koran, the Book of Mormon, and parts of the [Hindu] Veda. But none of these books contains predictive prophecy. As a result, fulfilled prophecy is a strong indication of the unique, divine authority of the Bible" (The New Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, p. 13). Bible prophecy stands in marked contrast to human attempts to predict the future. A study of 25 top-rated psychics discovered that 92 percent of their predictions were totally wrong, and that chance or general knowledge of circumstances could explain the remaining 8 percent that were accurate (Geisler, p. 615). Anyone familiar with the so-called prophecies of Nostradamus (Michael de Nostredame), the 16th century French psychic who dabbled in astrology, alchemy and other occult practices, is aware that his vague and nebulous verses simply do not compare to biblical prophecies. Specific prophecies, given centuries before they were accurately and consistently fulfilled, are some of the most stunning proofs that the Bible is the inspired word of God!
Hundreds of Prophecies About Jesus Christ!

Some of the Bible's most striking examples of fulfilled prophecies are those that accurately foretold specific details about the life, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, centuries before He was born! More than 200 prophecies, written centuries before His birth, foretold specific events in His life that were fulfilled to the letter. He would be born of a virgin and named Immanuel (Isaiah 7:14; Matthew 1:23), in Bethlehem (Micah 5:2; Matthew 2:3–8). He would be a descendant of David (Matthew 1:1; 22:42–45). He would sojourn in Egypt (Hosea 11:1; Matthew 2:13–15). His birth would prompt a massacre of children (Jeremiah 31:15; Matthew 2:16–18). He would live in Galilee (Isaiah 9:1–2; Matthew 2:19–23). He would enter Jerusalem on a donkey (Zechariah 9:9; Matthew 21:1–5). He would die with transgressors and be buried in the tomb of a rich man (Isaiah 53:9, 12). He would be resurrected after three days (Matthew 12:40; Jonah 1:17).

The remarkable fulfillment of hundreds of specific predictions, recorded centuries earlier in the Hebrew Scriptures, demonstrates beyond any reasonable doubt that Jesus was the prophesied Messiah of the Bible and the Son of God. It should be noted that "Mohammedanism cannot point to any prophecies of the coming of Mohammed uttered hundreds of years before his birth. Neither can the founders of any cult… rightly identify any ancient text specifically foretelling their appearance" (McDowell, p. 22). Some Muslim scholars cite Old Testament verses that they say prophesied Muhammad (Deuteronomy 18:15–18), but it was Jesus Christ who actually fulfilled those prophecies (see Matthew 21:11; Luke 1:76; 24:19; Acts 3:18–22) more than 600 years before Muhammad was born! The Bible's prophecies about Jesus Christ are unique among religious writings.
Cities and Kings

The Bible contains more than 1,500 prophecies that foretell in remarkable detail the future of prominent cities, kings and kingdoms. Fulfilled prophecies about the ancient Phoenician city of Tyre stand as a sobering testimony to the power and accuracy of Bible prophecy. When Ezekiel recorded his prophecies (around 585bc), Tyre was one of the great cities of the ancient world. It was situated on an island at the center of a maritime trading network that controlled Mediterranean commerce. Tyre was a wealthy emporium of goods, surrounded by 150-foot-high walls that were considered impregnable. The Bible reports that Tyre's citizens rejoiced when Nebuchadnezzar and his Babylonian army conquered Jerusalem; they anticipated gaining access to valuable inland trade routes passing through Jerusalem. In response, God delivered a series of specific prophecies of Tyre's future devastation. Ezekiel wrote that, "because Tyre has said against Jerusalem, 'Aha! She is broken who was the gateway of the peoples'… Therefore thus says the Lord God: 'Behold, I am against you, O Tyre, and will cause many nations to come up against you, as the sea causes its waves to come up. And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre and break down her towers; I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock. It shall be a place for spreading nets in the midst of the sea… they will lay your stones, your timber, and your soil in the midst of the water… you shall never be rebuilt, for I the Lord have spoken, says the Lord God'" (Ezekiel 26:2–14).

To appreciate the power and scope of Ezekiel's prophecies, picture someone trying to predict what will happen to New York or London over the next 2,500 years! Yet history records how Ezekiel's predictions have come to pass. In 585bc, Nebuchadnezzar began a 13-year siege against Tyre. His was the first of many nations that would come like waves against Tyre. Around 530bc, the Persians gained control of Tyre. In 332bc, Alexander destroyed the mainland portion of Tyre and threw the debris into the sea to build a causeway for assaulting the island city. When Alexander conquered the island fortress of Tyre, he battered down the walls and reduced the city to ruins. As Phoenician specialist Glenn Markoe wrote, "The conquest of Alexander… marked the beginning of the end for Tyre and Phoenicia… Tyre would soon recover commercially… yet it would never fully reclaim the pride of place it had enjoyed" (Phoenicians, Markoe, p. 61). Greeks and Romans later dominated what remained of the city. In 638ad, Muslim armies captured Tyre. Crusaders recaptured the city in 1124, and used it as a staging area for military operations. In 1291, the Muslims retook Tyre and laid it in ruins, "after which she never again regained any importance" (Geisler, p. 870). Today, there is a small fishing village near the ruins of the once proud city of Tyre, but the city's ancient power and splendor, and its extensive trade network, are gone. The site of one of the wealthiest cities in the ancient world has become "a place for spreading nets," just as the Bible predicted.

The Bible contains prophecies about other cities near Tyre that would have a bloody history but a different future. Sidon, an idol-worshiping Phoenician city about 20 miles north of Tyre, was noted for artistic metalwork and fine cloth. Bible prophecies reveal that Sidon would have a bloody history and suffer from pestilence, but would come to "know that I am the Lord" (Ezekiel 28:21–23). Nowhere did God prophesy total destruction or oblivion for Sidon. History records that the Assyrians destroyed Sidon in 678bc, but the city was rebuilt, and it submitted to Nebuchadnezzar after suffering from a devastating pestilence. Persians burned the city in about 351bc. Syria and Egypt fought over Sidon, and it became a free city under Roman rule. The Bible indicates that Jesus may have visited Sidon (Matthew 15:21) and that Sidonians heard Jesus preach the gospel (Mark 3:7–8). The Apostle Paul also visited Sidon (Acts 27:3). Today, modern Sidon is known for its gardens and orange groves. Bible prophecy outlined a very different future for Tyre's sister city Sidon—and it came to pass, just as Scripture predicted!

Around 700bc, the prophet Isaiah recorded several specific prophecies about the downfall of the Babylonian Empire and the destruction of the city of Babylon (see Isaiah 13; 14). At the time of Isaiah's prophecy, Babylon was subject to the Assyrians and would not become a major power for another hundred years. Yet Isaiah foresaw the future glory that Babylon would achieve under Nebuchadnezzar with its Hanging Gardens, magnificent palaces, luxurious living, massive walls and military conquests. Isaiah also foresaw the Medes' destruction of Babylon, and the city's ultimate desolation, several hundred years in advance! Isaiah's prophecies foretold: "The burden against Babylon… I will stir up the Medes against them… And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldeans' pride, will be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It will never be inhabited, nor will it be settled from generation to generation; nor will the Arabian pitch tents there… but wild beasts of the desert will lie there… her days will not be prolonged" (Isaiah 13:1–22). History records that these prophecies were fulfilled: "In 539 [bc] Babylon fell to the Medes and Persians... Xerxes destroyed the city in 478, and it was finally abandoned in the 4th century bc" (Eerdmans' Handbook of the Bible, p. 382).
The Chosen People

Some of the Bible's most amazing and surprising prophecies deal with the descendants of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob—the twelve tribes of Israel, whom God chose to use for a special purpose (Exodus 19:1–6). God promised Abram (Abraham) that in return for obedience, his descendants would become great and be a blessing to the world (Genesis 12:1–3). Later prophecies stated that Jacob's descendants through Manasseh and Ephraim would ultimately become a "great" nation, and a great "multitude [company, commonwealth] of nations," who, along with the other descendants of Jacob, would in Bible prophecy be called Israelites (Genesis 48:14–22). In the Bible, the terms Israel and Israelite generally apply to the descendants of all twelve of Jacob's sons. The Jews are the descendants of Judah, who was just one of Jacob's sons. In a more specific sense, Israel applies to the descendants of the ten tribes that made up the nation of Israel (with its capital in Samaria), which broke away from the nation of Judah (with its capital in Jerusalem) when the kingdom of Solomon was divided (see 1 Kings 12). This biblical distinction between the Jews and the other Israelite nations is an important key to understanding Bible prophecy.

Genesis 49 contains a remarkable series of prophecies foretelling how the Israelites—descendants of Jacob's twelve sons—will be recognized "in the last days." Reuben will become powerful and have notions of grandeur, but will lack national stability; consider how this description could describe France. Judah (the Jews) will provide the Messiah and retain knowledge of the Law of God. Zebulun will dwell by the sea and become a mercantile people; a description evocative of modern Holland. Dan will leave its mark, having traveled from its base in the Middle East; a description evocative of Denmark and Ireland. Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh) will become a colonizing people dwelling in the choice places of the earth—and dwelling "separate from his brothers"—a description perfectly apt to describe the former British Commonwealth nations and the U.S. (see Genesis 49:22–26). These remarkable prophecies were not to be fulfilled only by the Jews—to whom the world gives the name "Israel"—but also by eleven other nations that are part of the "whole house" of Israel. These prophecies reveal keys to the identity and location of the modern descendants of Jacob's twelve sons—the children of Israel. For a more detailed discussion of this topic, please request our free booklet, The United States and Great Britain in Prophecy.

Understanding the true identity of the Israelite nations is not only a key for understanding Bible prophecy; this knowledge is also essential for God's Church, which must fulfill the commission that Jesus gave. Jesus commissioned His disciples to "go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel"—to preach about the coming kingdom of God, and warn the Israelites about terrible trials they would face in the last days because of their disobedience to God's laws (see Jeremiah 30:7–24). Jesus' disciples took this commission seriously. In their day, the tribes of Israel were not "lost." The Apostle James addressed his epistle "to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad" (James 1:1). Josephus revealed that in the days of the apostles, "ten tribes are beyond the Euphrates… and are an immense multitude" (Antiquities of the Jews, Book XI, 5, 2). This explains why several of the apostles, including Peter and Andrew, traveled in that direction.

Historical sources also indicate that Peter, Paul and others traveled to Western Europe and Britain preaching the gospel. The clear implication of these leading apostles' journeys to the West is that Israelite peoples were there! Examine the history of ancient Ireland, and notice which Israelite tribal name appears in the records. When you study the Genesis 49 prophecies about the characteristics and future history of Jacob's descendants, you will notice the connection with peoples that currently reside in, or emigrated from, northwest Europe! When you understand the identities of modern Israelite nations, you can begin to understand from Bible prophecy what lies ahead for these nations—and for other nations mentioned in Bible prophecy!
The Future of Nations

Bible prophecies are not just about ancient history. The book of Daniel contains detailed yet sweeping prophecies that provide an outline of history from the time of Nebuchadnezzar's Babylon through the return of Jesus Christ at the end of the age. Modern critics, seeking to discredit the prophetic and supernatural elements in the book of Daniel, have revived ideas put forward by Porphyrius, a third-century pagan philosopher from Tyre. Porphyrius (also called Porphyry) claimed that the book of Daniel was a fraudulent work produced in the second century bc, after the events it recounts had already taken place! However, this theory does not square with the facts. The book of Daniel gives precise dates, locations and names that can be verified. The prophet Ezekiel was a contemporary of Daniel, and mentioned him very respectfully (Ezekiel 14:20). The book of Daniel was widely accepted as inspired, and was included in the Hebrew Bible in the second century bc. Jesus acknowledged Daniel as the author of the book (Matthew 24:15). One respected source notes: "In NT prophecy Daniel is referred to more than any other book in the OT. Moreover, it contains more fulfilled prophecies than any other book in the Bible" (see The Expositor's Bible Commentary, vol. 7, p. 3).

Daniel recorded a dream about a huge image (Daniel 2). The four parts of the image—head, chest, belly and thighs, legs and feet—pictured four empires that would arise in the future to dominate the Mediterranean world. Bible scholars now recognize these empires as the Babylonian Empire, the Medo-Persian Empire, the Greco-Macedonian Empire under Alexander the Great and the Roman Empire. Daniel also revealed that Jesus Christ will strike the last remnant of the Roman Empire on its feet and toes (made of iron and clay) when He returns to set up His kingdom on this earth at the end of this age (Daniel 2:41–45). Daniel described the same four empires as four beasts, and gave additional details about each. The third empire (Greco-Macedonian under Alexander) was pictured with four heads (Daniel 7:6). History records that after Alexander's death, his empire split into four parts, about 300 years after Daniel recorded the prophecy. Daniel described the fourth beast (the Roman Empire) as having ten horns representing "ten kings who shall arise from this kingdom" (Daniel 7:7, 24). History records the many attempts to continue or revive the Roman Empire down through the centuries. They have all occurred in Europe, including revivals under Charlemagne, Charles V of the Hapsburgs, Napoleon and Mussolini. According to Bible prophecy, the final revival will be lead by a person labeled "the beast," backed by a religious leader called the "false prophet" (see Revelation 13 and 17). For more information about these end-time prophetic developments, please request our free booklet, The Beast of Revelation.

Daniel also mentions a "little horn" that will disown the first three attempts to continue the Roman Empire, but will be intimately involved with subsequent revivals of the Roman Empire in its various forms. This figure is prophesied as speaking "pompous words against the Most High… persecute the saints… [and] change times and law" (Daniel 7:8, 20, 24–25). This "little horn" foreshadows those religious leaders who have claimed to be the "vicar of Christ" (meaning "in place of Christ"), who murdered Bible-believing Christians through an Inquisition and who replaced commanded biblical Holy Days with pagan holidays. Other prophecies identify this "little horn" as a prominent religious figure whose latter-day counterpart will play a key role in events leading to Jesus Christ's return (2 Thessalonians 2; Revelation 13; 17).

The ten toes of Daniel's image (Daniel 2:40–43) correspond to ten kings who will give their power and authority to "the beast," a powerful and deceptive political leader who will emerge on the scene in Europe just before Jesus Christ returns at the end of the age (Revelation 17:1–13). This political leader will receive support from, and be influenced by, a powerful religious leader—the final manifestation of the "little horn." Like his predecessors, this "little horn" will play a key role in world politics (Revelation 13; 17). History records that Roman Catholic popes have crowned the emperors of the Holy Roman Empire, and that popes and bishops have long influenced European politics. The iron and clay of the ten toes of Daniel's image foretells the attempts by squabbling European nations to form a union by surrendering their sovereignty to a central government (akin to what the E.U. has done in Brussels). Current attempts to create a united Europe modeled on the old Roman Empire have been backed by several popes and the Roman Church. Daniel and other books of the Bible indicate that the final fulfillment of these remarkable prophecies will occur in the years just ahead!

It is ironic that while these ancient and detailed prophecies are coming alive today, leaders of the Roman Church insist that the symbolic language used in Daniel and Revelation "is not to be interpreted literally. We should not expect to discover in this book [Revelation] details about the end of the world" (The Times, October 5, 2005)—yet that is exactly what these prophetic books claim to reveal! Today, for people who really want to understand where world events are leading, the challenge is: Whom do you believe, theologians or the Bible? This is why it is important to determine whether or not the Bible is truly the word of God—whether it is fact or fiction!
The End of the World

Sadly, modern skeptics—and even many who claim to believe in Jesus Christ—dismiss ideas about the end of the age as pure fantasy and wild-eyed doomsday talk. Yet the Bible takes a linear view of history, and pictures all events moving toward a climax. The prophecies in Daniel take this view, with the climax being Jesus Christ's return to establish the kingdom of God on this earth. Jesus spoke freely and in detail about specific events that would signal the end of the age. When Jesus' disciples asked Him, "what will be the sign of your coming, and of the end of the age" He did not beat around the bush or try to avoid answering the question, as many theologians do today (Matthew 24:3). He told His disciples to watch for a time when they would see widespread religious confusion and deception, and increasingly frequent reports of violence, wars, ethnic strife, famines, disease epidemics and natural disasters on a global scale (Matthew 24:4–7).

These are the very headlines dominating our news today! Yet Jesus said that this would be just the "beginning of sorrows" (Matthew 24:8). Christ went on to reveal that there will be a global persecution of Christians, but that the true gospel of the coming kingdom of God will nevertheless "be preached in all the world as a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come" (Matthew 24:14). Jesus said that all these events leading up to the climax of this age will occur at a time in history when the very existence of life on this planet will be threatened. Notice Jesus' description that "unless those days were shortened [by Jesus' return], no flesh would be saved; but for the elect's sake those days will be shortened" (Matthew 24:22). Jesus admonished His disciples to watch—to remain alert—so that they will recognize when the civilizations of this world are entering their final hour (Matthew 24:36–44; 25:1–13; Mark 13:32–37; Luke 21:34–38).

In the 1950s, world leaders first realized that, with the development of nuclear weapons, mankind has created the capacity to destroy all life from the face of the earth. This was never possible until the last half of the 20th century! Is it just a coincidence that between 1950 and today we have seen the global spread of HIV-AIDS, the return of drug-resistant tuberculosis and the threat of international pandemics of bird flu and other infectious diseases? Is it just a coincidence that today we are concerned with the emerging threat of global warming and the sobering consequences of global climate change? Is it just a coincidence that all this is happening amid rising fears about international terrorism and escalating conflict in the Middle East—all of which Scripture predicted long ago? Is this all coincidence, or are we seeing the approaching fulfillment of ancient Bible prophecies that describe in detail the end of the age? These astoundingly accurate prophecies distinguish the Bible from any other book on this planet, and they offer proof that the Bible was written by "the finger of God."
Chapter 3
Did God Inspire the Bible?

One of the Bible's most striking features is that it plainly claims to be the inspired word of an Almighty God. We see this in the words of the Apostle Paul, a highly educated Hebrew who wrote, "All Scripture is given by inspiration of God" (2 Timothy 3:16). The Apostle Peter wrote that the content of Scripture "never came by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit" (2 Peter 1:21). To early Church leaders, "inspiration was not an ecstatic overpowering of the writer's consciousness, but rather a high degree of illumination and calm awareness of God's revelation… extending to every word of Scripture" (The Origin of the Bible, Bruce, et al., p. 38). Scripture indicates, and the early Church recognized, that God inspired the biblical writers to use their own minds and their own styles to write what God wanted them to write.

The Bible describes the process of divine inspiration in the way God worked with Moses, "And God spoke all these words… And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord… when Moses had completed writing the words of this law in a book… Moses commanded the Levites… Take this Book of the Law, and put it beside the ark of the covenant" (Exodus 20:1; 24:4; Deuteronomy 31:24–26). Centuries later, Ezra and Nehemiah read to the people of Israel from the "Book of the Law of Moses," which was also called "the Book of the Law of God" (Nehemiah 8:1, 18). Jesus acknowledged its divine inspiration when He said, "have you not read in the book of Moses… how God spoke to him" (Mark 12:26). The prophet Jeremiah recorded a similar experience: "The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, 'Thus speaks the Lord God of Israel, saying: Write in a book for yourself all the words that I have spoken to you" (Jeremiah 30:1–2). The phrase, "Thus says the Lord" is used more than 350 times in the Old Testament, clearly implying that the words of Scripture came from God.

As we will see, other religious books may claim divine inspiration like the Bible, yet they lack the specific characteristics that confirm the Bible's authenticity.

Not only does the Bible claim to be divinely inspired, it claims to be the ultimate source of truth, revealed by the one true God. The Apostle John wrote, "Thy word is truth" (John 17:17, KJV). David wrote, "Your law is truth… all Your commandments are truth... The entirety of Your word is truth" (Psalm 119:142, 151, 160). The prophet Isaiah asserted, "To the law and to the testimony! If they do not speak according to this word, it is because there is no light in them" (Isaiah 8:20). Isaiah meant that if statements and ideas do not agree with Scripture, we can recognize them as false. The Apostle Paul also calls Scripture "the word of truth" (2 Timothy 2:15).

These statements stand in marked contrast to the uncertain words spoken by Pontius Pilate, "What is truth?" (John 18:38). Today, many skeptics and cynics share Pilate's question. Yet the Bible's bold claims show that its writers clearly believed that the words they recorded were absolutely true and inspired by a wise and all-powerful God (see Genesis 17:1; Psalm 86:10; Jude 1:25). What is truth? You need to prove that for yourself!

The Bible repeatedly emphasizes, "the Lord is the true God" (Jeremiah 10:10; see also John 17:3; 1 Thessalonians 1:9; 1 John 5:20). Scripture records that when the ancient Egyptian priests saw the miracles announced by Moses, and saw their own gods powerless, they concluded: "This is the finger of God" (Exodus 8:16–19). Daniel records that Nebuchadnezzar, pagan king of Babylon, came to the same conclusion after encountering the God of the Bible: "Truly, your God is the God of gods, the Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets" (Daniel 2:47). The Bible records that the Apostle Paul, distressed at seeing Athens "given over to idols," taught superstitious Greek philosophers about the true God (Acts 17:16–34). For more information about the true God of the Bible, request our free booklet, The Real God: Proofs and Promises.

The Bible's clear and unambiguous message is that Scripture is the inspired word of a real God, and is the ultimate source of truth! This is difficult for many today to believe, because we live in a skeptical age where even so-called biblical scholars doubt that the Bible really is God's word. However, the Bible's bold claim that it is the inspired word of an all-powerful God, and is true in its entirety, can be verified in the records of history and the discoveries of archaeology. The evidence is there for anyone willing to look!
Critics Challenge the Bible

Scripture boldly asserts that "the word of our God stands forever" and "the word of the Lord endures forever" (Isaiah 40:8; 1 Peter 1:25). King David wrote, "His truth endures to all generations" (Psalm 100:5). Yet, down through the centuries, antagonists and critics have tried to undermine, disparage, defy and destroy Scripture, and even mock the God of the Bible. The Bible warns, "Do not be deceived; God is not mocked" (Galatians 6:7). The Old Testament records that during the Assyrian invasion of Judah (ca. 700bc), Sennacherib, a pagan Assyrian king, mocked the God of Israel before king Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem (2 Chronicles 32:9–19). Shortly thereafter, "the Lord sent an angel who cut down every mighty man of valor… in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he [Sennacherib] returned shamefaced to his own land. And when he had gone into the temple of his god, some of his own offspring struck him down with the sword there" (2 Chronicles 32:21–22).

Historical records confirm that Sennacherib did not conquer Jerusalem, and that his own sons killed him. Secular history does not explain why this occurred. However, the Bible reveals that dire consequences can arise when doubters and critics mock the real God! Next to the exodus from Egypt, this is one of God's most dramatic interventions in Israel's history, and the facts of secular history support the biblical record. Incidentally, the Greek historian Herodotus relates that Sennacherib also suffered an embarrassing setback, with supernatural overtones, when his army invaded Egypt and a swarm of field mice chewed up their weapons, causing him to flee from the field near Pelusium with heavy losses (The Histories, 2:141). This truth of Scripture—that God will not be mocked—stands confirmed.

In the century after the apostles, historical sources confirm that Celsus, an articulate pagan philosopher, created a major stir when he wrote a blistering attack against the Bible and Christianity. Celsus wrote that biblical teachings were "absurd," that the gospel accounts were "a deception" and that anyone who believed in one God was "deluded" (Is the Bible True?, Sheler, p. 9). The Bible survived, and Christianity spread around the world, but few people today have even heard of Celsus! Modern biblical critics who have resurrected Celsus' ideas should remember that his attack on Scripture was answered by an early religious scholar named Origen, whose eight-volume Against Celsus gave a point-by-point rebuttal in defense of the Bible.

At the beginning of the 4th century, the Roman emperor Diocletian sought to wipe out the Christian religion. He unleashed a terrible persecution of Christians, and commanded that all Bibles be burned. However, within a few short years a new emperor (Constantine) actually ordered the production of 50 Bibles! During the Middle Ages (ca. 500–1500ad), scholars influenced by pagan philosophy taught that scriptural accounts were merely allegories and should not be taken literally. Their allegorical approach assumed that Bible passages hid a deeper meaning, making the literal meaning unimportant. The Bible survived, but this way of thinking also survives today in many theological schools. The allegorical approach is a very subtle way of undermining the Bible's clear message, because it ignores what the Bible actually says.

Secular scholars in the 18th century became enthralled by the apparent power of human reason and the new discoveries of science. Regarding human reason as the ultimate authority, and armed with a bias against the supernatural, these critics began to offer speculative theories about the Bible's supposed origins, apparent contradictions and assumed errors. However, the assumptions and speculations of these critics have not stood the test of time. In fact, some of their bold pronouncements now appear extremely presumptuous and naïve. Toward the end of the 18th century, the French philosopher Voltaire predicted that Christianity would be swept from existence within a century. Yet, 50 years after he died, the Geneva Bible Society produced stacks of Bibles in Voltaire's house on his own press (The New Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, p. 10). The facts of history and the discoveries of archaeology make it plain: secular critics' ill-founded pronouncements and theories are intellectual castles built on hot air.
Evidence from Archaeology

Over the last 200 years, the rise of biblical criticism spawned many confident assertions by scholars who doubted the inspiration of Scripture. Skeptics at first claimed that since there was no evidence outside the Bible of various people and places mentioned in the Bible, the writers of Scripture must have invented them. This approach found fertile ground in "progressive" schools of theology, and in secular academic circles. The press and media fed these ideas to society, furthering doubts about the Bible's credibility. This doubt and skepticism persists today, even though ongoing archaeological discoveries continue to validate the Bible's historical accuracy, and discredit the skeptics' assumptions!

As recently as 1992, some scholars were confidently asserting, "There are no literary criteria for believing David to be more historical than Joshua, Joshua more historical than Abraham, and Abraham more historical than Adam" (see "House of David Built on Sand," Biblical Archaeology Review, July/August 1994, pp. 54–55). Yet, just one year later, archaeologists digging in upper Galilee discovered a 9th century bc inscription about the "house of David." Jeffrey Sheler, an award-winning journalist and a religion writer for U.S. News & World Report, wrote: "The fragmentary reference to David was a historical bombshell. Never before had the familiar name of Judah's ancient warrior king… been found in the records of antiquity outside the pages of the Bible" (Is the Bible True?, p. 60).

For decades, critics viewed the biblical story of David and Goliath as a fanciful tale of religious fiction. Yet, recently, "archaeologists digging at the purported biblical home of Goliath [Gath, see 1 Samuel 17:4] have unearthed a shard of pottery bearing an inscription of the Philistine's name, a find they claimed lends historical credence to the Bible's tale of David's battle with the giant" (The London Times, November 13, 2005). This is the oldest Philistine inscription ever discovered, dated to 950bc—within 70 years of the biblical narrative.

Doubting scholars for years assumed that "there were no Hittites at the time of Abraham, as there were no records of their existence apart from the Old Testament. They must be a myth" (McDowell, p. 11). However, later "archaeological research… uncovered more than 1,200 years of Hittite civilization" (ibid.). In similar fashion, critics assumed that the biblical patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were fictional figures from Hebrew folklore. Yet cuneiform tablets discovered in the royal archives of the palace of Mari in northern Syria, dating from the start of the second millennium bc (the approximate time of the patriarchs) mention "such names as Abam-ram (Abraham), Jacob-el and Benjamites" (When Skeptics Ask, Geisler & Brooks, pp. 186–187). All these discoveries support the biblical record and refute the charges of critics.

Scholars skeptical of the Bible have noted the similarity between the Genesis creation account and Babylonian clay tablets describing the creation of the world. These scholars have glossed over major differences in the accounts, and suggested that biblical writers simply borrowed their material from other sources. However, the discovery of more that 17,000 clay tablets at Ebla (in modern Syria), dating from 2500bc, has overturned the critics' theories. The Ebla tablets (which predate the Babylonian creation epic by some 600 years) contain "the oldest known creation accounts outside the Bible… The creation tablet is strikingly close to that of Genesis, speaking of one being who created the heavens, moon, stars and earth. Parallels show that the Bible contains the older, less embellished version… They [the Ebla tablets] destroy the critical belief in the evolution of monotheism from supposed earlier polytheism" (Baker Encyclopedia of Christian Apologetics, Geisler, p. 208).

There have been dozens of other remarkable discoveries. The Merneptah Stela describes an Egyptian pharaoh conquering Israel (ca. 1200bc). The Black Obelisk from Nimrud pictures Israelite king Jehu bowing before Assyrian king Shalmaneser III. An inscription near Jerusalem refers to "Joseph, son of Caiaphas" (Caiaphas was the high priest in Jerusalem at the time of Christ's crucifixion; see Matthew 26:57). An inscribed stone from first century Caesarea reads, "Pontius Pilate, the Prefect of Judea" (Pilate was the Roman governor at the time of Jesus' crucifixion; see Matthew 27:2). Such evidence, carved in stone, supports the conclusion that the Bible writers were recording facts and not fiction (see The Signature of God, Jeffrey, pp. 72–74; Is the Bible True?, Sheler, pp. 110–112).

The manner in which archaeology has verified the historical accuracy of the Bible has been nothing short of remarkable! As noted archaeologist Nelson Glueck has written, "it may be clearly stated categorically that no archaeological discovery has ever controverted a single biblical reference. Scores of archaeological findings have been made which confirm in clear outline or exact detail historical statements in the Bible" (Rivers in the Desert, Glueck, p. 136). Glueck's comments echo the words of another prominent archaeologist, William F. Albright, who stated, "There can be no doubt that archaeology has confirmed the substantial historicity of Old Testament tradition… The excessive skepticism shown toward the Bible by important historical schools of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries… has been progressively discredited" (Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, vol. 1, p. 65). The evidence of history and archaeology defies the critics, and supports Scripture!
Chapter 4
Has the Bible Been Preserved Accurately?

How can we know whether the text of the Bible has been preserved accurately down through the centuries? Is it logical to believe that a book written by more than 40 authors in different locations over 1,500 years can be trustworthy? Can we prove that the text we have today is reliable?

If the Bible is the inspired word of an Almighty God who encourages people to "check the facts," we should expect to find convincing evidence that Scripture has been preserved carefully and accurately over time. Such evidence is available—in Scripture itself! Evidence can also be found in Jewish historical literature, in the writings of early Church scholars and in a multitude of modern sources. The evidence for the accurate transmission of the Bible is remarkable, overwhelming and, indeed, irrefutable!
Old Testament Preservation

The Apostle Paul revealed where to find evidence of Scripture's preservation when he wrote, "What advantage then has the Jew…? to them were committed the oracles of God" (Romans 3:1–2). Biblical scholar Bernard Ramm comments, "The Jews preserved it [the Old Testament] as no other manuscript has ever been preserved" (McDowell, p. 9). When God revealed His laws to their ancestors, they were given a mandate: "You shall not add to the word which I command you, nor take from it… be careful to observe them [the statutes of God]… teach them to your children and your grandchildren" (Deuteronomy 4:1–10). History clearly shows how this has occurred.

The Bible records that God gave His laws directly to Moses (ca. 1400bc), and that "when Moses had completed writing the words of this law in a book… Moses commanded the Levites… Take this Book of the Law, and put it beside the ark of the covenant" (Deuteronomy 31:24–26). This ark was a box containing stone tablets of the law carved by God and the writings of Moses (see Deuteronomy 10:5). It was kept in the Tabernacle, and later in the Temple at Jerusalem. The Bible shows Ezra the priest reading and explaining the "Book of the Law of Moses" to Jews who had returned to Jerusalem from Babylon in the fifth century bc (Nehemiah 8:1–12). By 150bc, there is even evidence from extra-biblical sources that the Pentateuch (the first five books of the Old Testament) was attributed to Moses (The Origin of the Bible, Bruce, et al., p. 56). In the first century ad, Jesus and the apostles also quoted from and referred to the books of Moses as inspired Scripture (see Mark 12:19–27; John 1:17; Romans 10:5). Thus, the Bible provides its own account of how Scripture was preserved and used over generations.
Canon Vs. Confusion

Evidence also exists from the Bible, as well as from historical sources, that the Old Testament consisted of specific books that were widely recognized as divinely inspired. The list of books recognized as inspired became the canon of the Old Testament, the Hebrew Bible. In the first century ad, both Jesus (Luke 24:44) and the Jewish teacher Philo referred to three major divisions of the Old Testament canon: the Law, the Prophets and the Writings (see Bruce, p. 60). Josephus, a first-century Jewish historian, acknowledged that the Hebrew Bible consisted of 22 books—essentially the same text which, divided differently, forms the 39 books of our modern Old Testament—and that these books "have all been accepted as canonical from time immemorial" (ibid., p. 61). The fact that 22 books of the Old Testament and 27 books of the New Testament comprise the 49 books of the complete Bible (49 is considered a number of completion) indicates that a divine mind was guiding this process. The Bible is not just a haphazard collection of books!

Modern scholars generally agree that the Hebrew Scriptures were recognized as inspired from an early date. According to one source: "The evidence supports the theory that the Hebrew canon was established well before the late first century ad, more than likely as early as the fourth century bc and certainly no later than 150bc" (McDowell, p. 26). Another source states: "No one doubts that the Pentateuch was both complete and canonical by the time of Ezra and Nehemiah, in the fifth century bc… such evidence implies that by the beginning of the Christian era the identity of all the [Old Testament] canonical books was well known and generally accepted" (The Origin of the Bible, Bruce, et al., p. 56). It is worth noting that none of the biblical writers or early Church scholars accepted as inspired the apocryphal books written in the inter-testamental period.
Exact Copies Prepared!

But how reliable are the Old Testament books that we have today? Has the text of the Old Testament been transmitted to us accurately? Consider the evidence. "In Judaism, a succession of scholars was charged with standardizing and preserving the biblical text" during a period extending from about 500bc to about 1000ad (McDowell, pp. 73–77). The earliest scribes, the Sopherim (400bc to 200ad), worked with Ezra and "were regarded as the Bible custodians until the time of Christ" (ibid.). They were followed by the Talmudists (100ad to 500ad) and finally by the Masoretes (500ad to 1000ad). Numerous accounts confirm that these scribes copied the biblical texts with extreme care, counting the number of words in a book, counting the number of times a letter appeared in a book, and even pointing out the middle letter in the Pentateuch and the middle letter in the Bible!

Because of such careful attention to detail in the preparation and transmission of Old Testament manuscripts, modern scholars acknowledge that "the Hebrew Bible has been transmitted with the most minute accuracy… it may safely be said that no other work of antiquity has been so accurately transmitted… [it is] little short of miraculous" (Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, pp. 55–56). The discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls in 1947 proved just how accurately the Jews have preserved and transmitted the Old Testament text. Before the discovery of the scrolls in a cave near the Dead Sea, the oldest copy of the Hebrew text dated from around 1000ad. The newly discovered scrolls dated to the first century bc—about 1,000 years earlier! The scrolls contained two nearly complete copies of the book of Isaiah, which proved "to be word for word identical with our standard Hebrew Bible in more than 95 percent of the text. The 5 percent of the variations consisted of obvious slips of the pen and variations in spelling" (When Skeptics Ask, Geisler & Brooks, pp. 158–159). The Dead Sea Scrolls provide solid evidence that the text of the Old Testament has not changed in more than 2,000 years!
The New Testament Preserved

The reliability of the New Testament rests on a wealth of material that is available. Scholars readily acknowledge, "There are earlier and more manuscripts of the New Testament than of any other book in the ancient world" (Baker Encyclopedia of Christian Apologetics, Geisler, p. 93). These manuscripts clearly reveal that the New Testament "has been transmitted to us with no, or next to no, variation" (Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, p. 44).

More than 24,000 manuscript copies of the New Testament in Greek, Latin and other languages provide evidence about the text. The earliest New Testament manuscripts date within a few decades or a few centuries of the apostolic writers. By comparison, there are only 643 manuscripts of Homer's Iliad (written in the 8th century bc), and the earliest copy in existence today dates from about 400bc—some 500 years after it was composed. Only 10–20 copies of writings of Julius Caesar, the Roman historian Tacitus, and the Greek historian Herodotus exist today, with the oldest manuscripts copied 1,000 years after the originals were composed (McDowell, pp. 39–43). Compared against the New Testament, no other document from the ancient world has left such a wealth of material documenting the reliable transmission of its text. In addition to the many available manuscripts, early Christian writers quoted the New Testament so extensively that almost the entire New Testament could be reconstructed from other sources.

Critics have theorized that unknown authors composed the gospels centuries after the apostles. Yet the earliest fragment of John's gospel is dated 130ad, about 30 years after the apostle's death. This supports the traditional view that John wrote his gospel towards the end of the first century (see McDowell, pp. 39–47). Also, "there is no evidence from the first two Christian centuries that the gospels ever circulated without the names of the authors attached" (Sheler, p. 33). One scholar has observed: "If we compare the present state of the New Testament text with that of any other ancient writing, we must... declare it marvelously correct" (McDowell, p. 45). Another prominent scholar stated: "It cannot be too strongly asserted that in substance the text of the Bible is certain: Especially is this the case with the New Testament… This can be said of no other ancient book in the world" (ibid.).
New Testament Canon

For decades, critics have charged that the books of the New Testament were not written until a century or more after Jesus and the apostles lived, and were probably pieced together by anonymous authors. Such a late composition would allow time for myths and legends to creep into the text. Some progressive theologians and modern authors, as in The DaVinci Code, also assert that the books of the New Testament were selected by politically motivated committees, and that valuable books were deliberately omitted, thereby compromising the Bible's accuracy and value. However, the internal evidence of the New Testament books, the facts of history and the weight of modern scholarship all refute these ideas!

Today, most credible scholars concur that "the New Testament canon with the Gospels and most of Paul's Epistles was formed by the end of the first century… The attested date for the canonical Gospels is no later than 60–100" ad (Geisler, p. 520). Neither Luke's gospel nor the book of Acts (also written by Luke) mention the 70ad destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, which was for Jews the most significant event of the century. Indeed, no New Testament author mentions the destruction of the Temple, which strongly suggests early authorship of the New Testament canon.

The New Testament books themselves reveal that the authors recognized which writings God had inspired, and belonged in the canon. The Apostle Paul wrote that "the things which I write to you are the commandments of the Lord" (1 Corinthians 14:37). Paul wrote that the teachings of the apostles were divinely inspired and were to be read in the churches, "because when you received the word of God which you heard from us, you welcomed it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God" (1 Thessalonians 2:13; 5:27). Peter warned that those who were twisting Paul's writings were twisting "the Scriptures" (2 Peter 3:15–16). Scholars in the early centuries of the Church accepted the apostles' writings as Scripture, but they "all draw a clear distinction between their own [writings] and the inspired, authoritative apostolic writings" (Bruce, p. 71). This argues strongly that the New Testament canon was recognized very early in Church history.

Tertullian, a religious historian who wrote in the early 200s, appears to be the first writer to call Christian Scripture the "New Testament." This is significant, because it "placed the New Testament Scripture on a level of inspiration and authority with the Old Testament" (Bruce, p. 66). From the 300s we have records showing that the New Testament canon consisted of 27 books—the same books we have today. A letter written in 367ad by Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, provides the earliest documentation of the exact 27 books of the New Testament canon. His letter, which was "designed to eliminate once and for all the use of certain apocryphal books," warns: "Let no one add to these; let nothing be taken away" (Bruce, p. 74). Later, in 397ad, a church council in Carthage decreed that "aside from the canonical Scriptures [which the council listed as 27 books] nothing is to be read in church under the Name of Divine Scriptures" (Bruce, p. 74). The clear purpose was to identify which books were part of the inspired New Testament canon, and to eliminate the use of apocryphal literature.
What About Apocryphal Books?

Just what are the apocryphal books? Why were they an issue of controversy in the early Church? Are they relevant today? The "Apocrypha" (which means hidden or concealed) refers to books that neither the Jews nor the early Church ever accepted as inspired or as part of the canon (see Bruce, pp. 79–94; Geisler, pp. 28–34). Most apocryphal books date to the inter-testamental period, and were written by anonymous authors or under the name of a person or a place named in Scripture. These books do not claim to be inspired. They contain no predictive prophecies, but instead contain historical and geographical errors and promote fanciful ideas and false doctrines that contradict canonical Scripture. Jesus and the New Testament writers never acknowledged the Apocrypha as Scripture. "No canonic list or church council accepted the Apocrypha for nearly the first four centuries" (Geisler, p. 33).

Although some apocryphal books were published along with canonical books in the Septuagint (a Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures produced by 70 scholars in Alexandria ca. 250bc), this translation was not supervised by scribes of the Judaic tradition, who had their centers in Tiberias and Babylon.

Josephus, writing in the first century ad, specifically excluded apocryphal books from the Hebrew canon when he wrote, "we have… but only twenty-two books, which are justly believed to be divine" (Against Apion, 1:8). Philo, a first century Jewish teacher in Alexandria, "quoted the Old Testament prolifically from virtually every canonical book. However, he never once quoted from the Apocrypha as inspired" (Geisler, p. 32). Prominent early writers such as Origen, Cyril of Jerusalem, Athanasius of Alexandria and Jerome all rejected the apocryphal books as inauthentic. In fact, it was Jerome (who prepared the Latin Vulgate Bible ca. 400ad) who first used the term Apocrypha when referring to books that were not considered part of the inspired biblical canon and should not be used to establish doctrine. Jerome disputed with the theologian Augustine, who felt that the apocryphal books were inspired and should be included in the canon, apparently because they had been included in the Septuagint.

The Apocryphal books became a major issue during the Reformation, when Protestants (following Jerome's thinking) rejected the Apocrypha as uninspired. However, at the Council of Trent in 1546, Roman Catholic leaders (following Augustine's ideas) declared those books part of the New Testament canon. This was an attempt by the Roman church to counter the influence of Martin Luther and other reformers who were teaching against celibacy, prayers for the dead, and purgatory—ideas that do not come from canonical Scripture but are found in some apocryphal books. Yet this was not the end of the controversy over apocryphal writings.
Gnostic "Gospels"?

In 1945, a group of books commonly called "Gnostic gospels" were found near Nag Hammadi, an Egyptian town north of Luxor, on the Nile. Gnosticism encompassed a collection of heretical ideas that early Church leaders attributed to Simon the Sorcerer (see Acts 8:9–25; Geisler, p. 274). Gnostic writings contain purported "secret sayings" of Christ that differ dramatically from His New Testament teachings. In the Gospel of Thomas, Jesus flies into a fit of rage and causes a child who has offended Him to wither (3:1–3). In another work, Jesus makes clay birds on the Sabbath; when His parents correct Him, He claps His hands and the birds fly away. The Gospel of Philip suggests that Christ had a romantic relationship with Mary Magdalene. The Gospel of Mary asserts that Mary was the real leader of Christ's disciples.

Early Church leaders denounced the Gnostic writings as spurious and heretical. Yet modern biblical critics, along with revisionist theologians, creative writers and mystical New Agers, have resurrected these "alternative" gospels and present them as equally credible as canonical Scripture. Dan Brown, author of the widely read fictional novel The DaVinci Code, draws heavily on the heretical ideas of Gnostic writings, as well as on occult, pagan goddess worship and mysticism. In his novel, he "makes the case that Mary Magdalene was… a strong independent figure, patron of Jesus, cofounder of his movement, his only believer in his greatest hour of need, author of her own Gospel, his romantic partner, and the mother of his child. To the millions of women who feel slighted, discriminated against, or unwelcome in churches of all faiths today, the novel is a chance to see early religious history in an entirely different light… The DaVinci Code opens everyone's eyes to a startlingly different view of the powerful role of women in the birth of Christianity. These themes have become mainstream at Harvard's divinity school and other intellectual centers" (Secrets of the Code, Bernstein, p. xxvii).

When Dan Brown makes his leading characters say, "almost everything our fathers taught us about Christ is false" and, "The Bible is a product of man, my dear, not God," he is promoting an agenda and world view that seeks to undermine and discredit the Bible, and the Jesus Christ of the Bible. Though the plot of The DaVinci Code appears to "advocate a courageous search for truth at any price, its real goal is to undermine one of the fundamental characteristics of the Christian faith—the belief that the original message of the Gospel, enshrined in the Bible, is the unique, inspired word of God" (Cracking the Code, Garlow & Jones, p. 72). The real danger of books like The DaVinci Code comes from doubts planted in the minds of people who lack historical and biblical knowledge. For such people, the fiction of apocryphal writings can appear to be fact, which leads to deception about the true nature of inspired Scripture. One of the primary reasons for public declarations about what books comprised the canons of the Old and New Testaments was to clearly distinguish between inspired books and the false and misleading writings of the Gnostics.
Chapter 5
Real Answers to Life's Big Questions

Today, many people live in a materialistic world of affluence and abundance. More people enjoy a higher standard of living today than at any other time in human history. Yet with more money in our pockets and more time on our hands, millions of people still find life empty and meaningless. More and more people today are finding that money, material things and searching for the ultimate experience simply do not provide lasting happiness, remove the emptiness or provide meaningful answers to the big questions of life: Why was I born? Why am I here? Why do I exist? What is the real purpose of life? What happens when I die?

Those who take time to look beyond themselves soon notice the tremendous inequities in our modern world, and wonder: Why do millions of human beings suffer from a lack of food, lack of fresh water, lack of sanitation and inadequate shelter? Why are so many people exploited and abused by corrupt leaders in failing countries? Why are wars and deliberate acts of horrific violence and terrorism proliferating around the world? Why is there no peace? Millions want a better world, but know they cannot make it happen. Why, then, does God fail to intervene—if indeed there is a God?

Few people find satisfaction in the vague answers they hear from most religious leaders and secular philosophers. To hear that human beings are merely "trousered apes"—nothing more than bags of DNA struggling to survive in a purposeless universe, awaiting eternal nothingness at death—does not provide an inspiring reason to live. On the other hand, it seems like purposeless fantasy to believe that the goal of life is to spend eternity sitting on a cloud, playing a harp. To hear that "God is love"—and then to witness all the evil and inequality in the world—simply does not add up. Tragically, many today have been led to believe that these answers are "as good as it gets."

But this is nonsense! Most people who assume that these are the best answers to life's big questions have never heard the real answers that God recorded in the Bible! Many theologians either do not know or do not believe what the Bible actually says about life's big questions. Because of our society's prejudice against the supernatural, fostered by biblical scholars who do not believe in the personal and all-powerful God of the Bible, millions have been conditioned to be skeptical of whatever Scripture might reveal about these subjects. However, the Bible provides real answers to life's big questions!
The Purpose of Life

Contrary to popular modern notions that life emerged from hot slimy pools of pre-biotic soup (akin to an idea espoused by pagan Greek philosophers) and that human beings evolved from an ape-like ancestor (as postulated by the disciples of Charles Darwin), the Bible reveals that God created human beings in His own image (Genesis 1:26–28). Whether or not you can believe this statement will depend on whether you can accept the plentiful evidence that the Bible is truly the word of God. According to Scripture, human beings were not created to amuse the gods, as some ancient philosophers assumed. The Bible reveals that God created humans so that they could learn to manage the earth (Genesis 1:26–28; 2:15), and build character by learning to discern right from wrong (Genesis 2:16–17). According to Scripture, God established the institutions of marriage and family (Genesis 2:18–24). He also established roles in marriage and revealed important guidelines so that these divinely ordained institutions would function smoothly and successfully (Matthew 19:3–9; Ephesians 5:22–33; 6:1–4; 1 Timothy 2:8–15; 1 Peter 3:1–7).

The reason for the biblical emphasis on learning to manage our own lives, and on functioning smoothly in marriage and family, is that we have been created to become members of God's spiritual family (see Romans 8:15–17; Hebrews 2:5–11; 1 John 3:1–3). If we qualify to become members of that spiritual family, we will reign with Jesus Christ when He returns to establish the kingdom of God on earth (see Revelation 1:4–6; 5:10). The Bible, when properly understood, clearly reveals that we do not fly off to heaven when we die (see John 3:13; Acts 2:29, 34; 13:36). When you understand what Scripture actually reveals about the purpose of life, you can begin to understand why the teachings of today's "mainstream" Christianity are not very satisfying or convincing. To learn more about the real purpose of life as it is revealed in Scripture, request our free booklet, Your Ultimate Destiny.
The Plan of God

But what is the cause of the human suffering that has occurred down through time? Why is there so much evil in the world? Why does God allow it? If there is a God, why does He fail to act? People ask these questions because they do not understand that God is working out a plan and a purpose on this earth. Scripture reveals His plan, and it is pictured in the Holy Days that He commanded His people to observe (Leviticus 23). God's plan reveals not only the cause of, but also the solution to, the problems we see in our world.

Many today do not believe in God's existence, but even fewer believe that Satan is real. However, Scripture reveals quite a bit about this spirit being. The Bible reveals that Satan was originally an "anointed cherub" covering the throne of God, who sinned, "became filled with violence" and led a rebellion against God involving one-third of the angels (see Ezekiel 28:1–19; Isaiah 14:12–17; Jude 6; Revelation 12:4). We see so much evil in the world today because Satan is the "god of this age… who deceives the whole world" by influencing people to reject the instructions and way of life that God has revealed in the Bible (2 Corinthians 4:3–4: Ephesians 2:1–2). You need to read these scriptures for yourself to verify what the Bible actually says about this individual who has deceived the whole world (Revelation 12:9).

The biblical Holy Days picture the major steps in God's plan of salvation. Those steps reveal that Jesus Christ came to die for the sins of mankind, to replace Satan as the god of this world. Jesus then raised up His Church (Acts 2)—called the "Church of God" (1 Corinthians 1:2; 10:32; 15:9; 2 Corinthians 1:1)—to preach the gospel of God's kingdom to the world (Mark 16:15) and to prepare a group of believers to become the "firstfruits" (James 1:18; Romans 8:23; Revelation 14:1–5) who will reign with Him in the coming kingdom of God for a thousand years—a period called the Millennium (Revelation 20:4–6).

The Bible also reveals that when Christ returns, Satan will be bound and put out of commission (Revelation 20:1–2). This is how God will eliminate evil, and will use the individuals whom He has prepared to solve the world's problems. This will all happen according to God's plan, which is revealed in Scripture. To learn more about God's great plan for humanity, request our free booklet The Holy Days: God's Master Plan. To learn more about the Church that began with Jesus Christ—and the remarkable and perilous course it has traveled through the centuries—request our booklet, God's Church Through the Ages.
The Age to Come

But what is the real hope for the future? Why should we struggle against the trials and temptations of this world? What is the value of learning to live by God's laws and the Bible's instructions? The answers emerge when we understand what the Bible reveals about the kingdom of God, and why it is called the "gospel." The word "gospel" means "good news" and the biblical message about the kingdom of God is good news—it is exciting news! The gospel of the kingdom of God, as described in the Bible, is not about some warm fuzzy feeling in your heart. It is about a coming world government that Jesus Christ will establish on this earth.

The Bible clearly reveals that Jesus will return to Jerusalem (Zechariah 14:4). He will take charge of the kingdoms of this world (Revelation 11:15–18) and set up a world government that will bring true justice and lasting peace to this planet. Jesus will be aided by the saints, individuals who understand the laws of God and have learned to function within the family of God, who will serve as civil and religious leaders—"kings and priests" (Revelation 5:10). God's government will bring peace and justice to the earth (Isaiah 9:6–7). The saints will also function as teachers (Isaiah 30:20–21) who will explain the laws of God (Isaiah 2:2–4), show people the way to peace (Psalm 119:165) and help them understand the real causes of strife and war (James 4:1–4). Christians are urged to "grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord" (2 Peter 3:18) so that they will be prepared to rule with Christ in this coming kingdom.

The Bible reveals that in the coming kingdom of God, rebuilt cities will promote a sense of community and will be in harmony with the environment (Isaiah 61:4; 11:6–9; Amos 9:14–15). Our polluted planet will be restored and made productive (Isaiah 35:1–7; Amos 9:13). The global curse of disease will be eliminated as people learn to live by the Bible's personal and public health laws (see Leviticus 3:17; 7:23–27; 11:1–47). The peoples of the world will learn to speak one language (Zephaniah 3:9), and "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea" (Isaiah 11:9). The Bible speaks of the coming kingdom of God as the "times of refreshing" in which there will be a "restoration of all things" (Acts 3:19–20). The Apostle Paul called this "the world to come" or "the age to come" (Hebrews 2:5). We also call it Tomorrow's World. The Bible holds out these scriptural teachings as our real hope for the future!

Modern critics scoff at taking Scripture literally, at face value. Many preachers do not even mention the exciting biblical information we have covered in this booklet. Instead, most willingly overlook or even ignore what history reveals about the teachings and beliefs of the early Church. Historian Edward Gibbon wrote: "The ancient and popular doctrine of the Millennium was intimately connected with the second coming of Christ… a joyful Sabbath of a thousand years; and that Christ, with the triumphant band of the saints and the elect… would reign upon earth… The assurance of such a Millennium was carefully inculcated by a succession of fathers from Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, who conversed with the immediate disciples… Though it might not be universally received, it appears to have been the reigning sentiment of the orthodox believers; and it seems so well adapted to the desires and apprehensions of mankind, that it must have contributed in a very considerable degree to the progress of the Christian faith" (The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Gibbon, vol. 1, pp. 187–188).

Gibbon wrote plainly that early Christians believed and taught about the Millennium—the coming kingdom of God. The Bible's exciting and inspiring gospel of God's kingdom motivated believers and spurred the growth of the early Church. However, Gibbon also recorded how early theologians, influenced by pagan philosophy—believing they knew better than God's inspired word—gradually watered down this important teaching of Scripture and then explained it away, first calling it allegory, then calling it heresy. Millions have lost sight of—or have never heard—the real biblical answers to life's big questions, because most scholars and religious leaders have rejected—or never heard—those answers! This is one reason why so many today find life empty and meaningless.
Conclusion:
Truth and Consequences

In our modern age, many seriously doubt or openly disbelieve that an all-powerful supernatural God inspired Scripture. Many assume that the Bible is no different than any other humanly authored book. Many also assume that modern scholarship has completely discredited the Bible, and that no evidence exists that proves otherwise. Yet, as we have seen in this booklet, the truth is just the opposite! These widely held beliefs and assumptions are, in reality, fictions that are totally contrary to the facts!

The big question that you face, and the challenge that confronts many others today, is: What exactly will you believe about the Bible? Will you believe the facts discussed in this booklet (which only scratches the surface of this vast subject), or will you accept skeptics' speculations that undermine and discredit the Bible—largely by ignoring the facts?

The God of the Bible can challenge us to "examine all things" and "prove" whether He exists (and whether He inspired the Bible), because there is so much remarkable and irrefutable evidence available! True biblical scholars know that the Bible is unlike any other religious book in the world, and that the most distinctive feature of the Bible is prophecy. Students of prophecy know that the Bible contains hundreds of specific prophecies that have been consistently and accurately fulfilled. No other book on the face of the earth contains such remarkable prophetic material, and human efforts to predict the future simply do not compare to the scope and accuracy of Bible prophecy. All this provides powerful evidence pointing to the Bible's divine origin.

The facts of history demonstrate that the Bible has been preserved and accurately transmitted for thousands of years, in spite of concerted efforts to outlaw, suppress, corrupt, burn and destroy it. The continued existence of the Bible under such adverse and hostile conditions offers strong support that an all-powerful God inspired such biblical statements as "the word of the Lord endures forever" and "My counsel shall stand." The remarkable way that archaeological discoveries continue to confirm Scripture's historical accuracy, and undermine critics' speculative theories, clearly affirms that the Bible is the inspired word of God! The Bible provides real answers to life's big questions, unlike academics, philosophers and theologians who offer mere platitudes. This strongly indicates that the Bible's answers were revealed from a supernatural source.

But why do critics and skeptics—who are often highly educated—ignore the facts and continue to claim that the Bible is only a collection of myths and legends, and is untrustworthy as a source of historical, theological or scientific information? Is it significant that secular-minded scholars have planted doubts about the Bible in the minds of millions of people today? What are the consequences of ignoring evidence that the Bible is the inspired word of God? Scripture provides informative answers and offers sobering warnings.

The Bible reveals the cause of this widespread deception: Satan "deceives the whole world" (Revelation 12:9). We can certainly see this when we consider the incredible misconceptions that so many have acquired about the Bible. Jesus prophesied that one sign of the "end of the age" would be the increasing number of false teachers who "will deceive many" by spreading false teachings (Matthew 24:3–5, 11). The Apostle Peter warned that false teachers would subtly bring in "destructive heresies" that would discredit the truth of God and deceive many people (2 Peter 2:1–3). He also warned that "scoffers will come in the last days, walking according to their own lusts"—casting doubts on Scripture and ignoring the facts of history (see 2 Peter 3:3–9). This deception will be widespread at the end of the age.

However, the Apostle Paul reveals that scoffers and false teachers will reap serious consequences from the God they are mocking and defying. He wrote: "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all… who suppress the truth in unrighteousness, because what may be known of God is manifest in them… so that they are without excuse, because, although they knew God, they did not glorify Him as God… but became futile in their thoughts, and their foolish hearts were darkened. Professing to be wise, they became fools" (Romans 1:18–22). Paul's condemnation of the misguided pagan intellectuals of his day also applies to the misguided scholars and critics of today—who ignore the powerful evidence that points to God as the author and sustainer of the Bible. We need to remember that there is a judgment coming!

The stinging reproofs that the prophet Jeremiah leveled at his contemporaries also apply in our present day. Jeremiah warned that "the prophets become wind, for the word [of God] is not in them… The prophets prophesy falsely… and My people love to have it so… the false pen of the scribe certainly works falsehood… the prophets prophesy lies in My name. I have not sent them… they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart, who try to make My people forget My name by their dreams… and cause My people to err by their lies and by their recklessness… they shall not profit this people at all" (Jeremiah 5:13, 31; 8:8; 14:14; 23:26, 30–32). God said through Jeremiah that because His people "have forsaken My law… and have not obeyed My voice… but they have walked according to the dictates of their own hearts… I will scatter them also among the Gentiles… I will send a sword after them until I have consumed them" (Jeremiah 9:13–16). The Bible clearly reveals that serious consequences will befall those who forsake the laws of God and promote their own theories, or follow those who do.

However, wonderful benefits come to those who prove and believe that the Bible is God's inspired word, and who follow God's biblical instructions. King David wrote: "Blessed are [they]… Who walk in the law of the Lord… Your commandments make me wiser than my enemies… Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path… Great peace have those who love Your law, and nothing causes them to stumble… All Your commandments are truth… The entirety of Your word is truth" (Psalm 119:98, 105, 151, 160, 165). The Bible reveals that God will look favorably on those who develop a deep respect for His word, and are willing to follow its instructions. The prophet Isaiah wrote, "But on this one will I look: On him who is poor and of a contrite spirit, and who trembles at My word" (Isaiah 66:2).

The Bible reveals that God has not left human beings to flounder without fundamental guidelines, or without important answers to life's big questions. God has inspired and preserved the Bible in a way that no other book has ever been preserved. He has filled Scripture with hundreds of prophecies that accurately predict the future—setting the Bible apart from all other religious books on earth. The discoveries of archaeology and the facts of history continue to confirm the validity of Scripture, even though it was written thousands of years ago. These facts are simply astounding and cannot reasonably be denied!

When you weigh critics' claims about the Bible against the tremendous evidence of the Bible's divine inspiration, you are left with a clear choice. You can choose to believe that critics' theories might have some foundation in fact, while waiting for the next theory to change and assumptions to be revised. Or you can trust the evidence from archaeology, history and fulfilled prophecy, which clearly reveals that the Bible is the inspired word of God—fact, not fiction!
Share Your Thoughts With Us!

Because of volume we may not be able to promptly reply to submissions using the form below.  If you require more immediate assistance please visit our “Contact Us” page.
Name *
Last Name *
Email *
Message *

    Read
        Magazine
            List Articles
            Subscribe
        Booklets
            Order
        Commentary
            Subscribe
        Pamphlets
        Woman to Woman
        Bible Study Course
            Register
        News and Prophecy
            Subscribe

Acts of God: Why Natural Disasters?

    Gerald Weston

Why do natural disasters ravage our world? Are hurricanes, earthquakes, and other disasters simply the natural order of things? Is mankind responsible for them, or does the label “acts of God” carry far more meaning than many realize? And what does...
Read More...
Armageddon and Beyond

    Richard F. Ames

Mankind is developing newer and more frightening technologies with which to destroy itself, while political and social tensions increase around the world. Will the years just ahead of us bring worldwide nuclear devastation, or usher in an era of...
Read More...
Christian Baptism: Its Real Meaning

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

What do you see when you look at yourself? How badly do you personally need God’s forgiveness? Do you really stand in need of a Savior? Perhaps you have already been baptized as a child, or even as an infant. You might not even remember the event....
Read More...
Do You Believe the True Gospel?

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

What did Jesus really preach? Do you know? Do not be too sure! Just what did Jesus mean by "the Kingdom of God"? Here is the exciting Good News: there is a new world coming!
Read More...
Does God Heal Today?

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

The Bible shows us that a day is coming when massive disease epidemics will ravage our world. Doctors and hospitals will be overwhelmed with the sick and dying. Those who have not learned to trust God will have nowhere to turn. But if you learn...
Read More...
Easter: The Untold Story

    Gerald Weston

Every year, billions of people observe a joyous Easter Sunday celebration. For some, it may be one of the few times each year they come to church. For others, it may be the culmination of observances going back to Ash Wednesday, Palm Sunday and Good...
Read More...
Evolution and Creation: What Both Sides Miss

    Wallace G. Smith

The theory of evolution is often described as an undeniable fact, proven by science. Does the evidence demand such a conclusion? Young-earth creationists claim that Earth and the universe were created 6,000 years ago. Does the Bible really teach...
Read More...
Fourteen Signs Announcing Christ's Return

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Do you know what lies ahead in your future? What about the future of your nation and the world? We are not living in ordinary times. We are nearing the end of an age—the end of a civilization.
Read More...
God's Church Through the Ages

    John H. Ogwyn (1949–2005)

God's Church has endured through the ages. It is a "little flock" (Luke 12:32), but God has always remained true to His promise that "the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it" (Matthew 16:18). In this revealing booklet, you will find a brief...
Read More...
God's People Tithe!

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Did you know that the Creator has a financial law that is applicable to true Christians today, and that Almighty God will bless those who are willing to obey this law in faith?
Read More...
God's Plan for Happy Marriage

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

There really are "keys" and time-tested principles that can help produce truly happy marriages! Our success in marriage depends upon our willingness to use these keys in our own lives.
Read More...
Is Christmas Christian?

    Living Church of God

We see the scene every year… decorated trees, evergreen wreaths and bright multi-colored lights. Sometimes there is a little crèche in the corner, depicting an infant child receiving lavish gifts. Yet most of the gift-giving these days is done by...
Read More...
Is This the ONLY Day of Salvation?

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

What will happen to the billions of human beings who have never known the true God - who have never accepted any form of Christianity? Are they forever doomed to a burning Hell or an eternity in outer darkness? What is the real answer to these...
Read More...
John 3:16

    Gerald Weston

How does God's love for the world, and for you individually, affect His Eternal promise for you and all mankind?  You can understand John 3:16 in a much more profound way than you might ever have!
Read More...
Marijuana: What They Aren't Telling You

    Stuart Wachowicz

Efforts to legalize the use of marijuana, for both “medicinal” and recreational purposes, continue to grow and find success in the halls of state and national governments. Is the drug as harmless as advocates claim? Could society benefit from...
Read More...
Prophecy Fulfilled: God's Hand in World Affairs

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Humanity today is facing staggering crises of war, disease, pollution, drought and famine. Where will it all lead? Bible prophecy reveals that God is working through current events to bring about a future time when the whole world will be at peace....
Read More...
Restoring Original Christianity

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

If Jesus of Nazareth were to return to the earth today, would He recognize the religion that is using His name? Not at all! Mankind has twisted Jesus Christ's teachings so that the religion bearing His name has practically no relationship to what He...
Read More...
Revelation: The Mystery Unveiled!

    John H. Ogwyn (1949–2005)

Many consider Revelation the most difficult-to-understand book in the Bible. Some dismiss its complicated narrative and vivid descriptions as mere allegory. Others assume that it recounts past history. The truth, however, is far more remarkable: if...
Read More...
Satan's Counterfeit Christianity

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

The astounding message in this booklet will affect you in the years just ahead, and it will also affect your eternal future! It is vitally important. This information has been suppressed for many centuries, but it is information that you need to...
Read More...
Successful Parenting: God's Way

    Jeffrey Fall

What is the real purpose of parenting? Is it merely to bring up children to become independent and competent adults, or is there something more? Read on, for the amazing answer!
Read More...
The Beast of Revelation: Myth, Metaphor or Soon-Coming Reality?

    John H. Ogwyn (1949–2005)

How will global religio-political developments affect you and your family? Will a world dictator soon appear? Just who or what is the Beast, and will you receive its infamous mark? Read on for the startling answers!
Read More...
The Bible: Fact or Fiction?

    Douglas S. Winnail

Is the Bible just a collection of myths and legends, or is it the inspired word of God? Many assume that modern scholarship has discredited the Bible, but the facts of history — and the discoveries of archaeology — confirm its contents to be true!...
Read More...
The Holy Days: God's Master Plan

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Why do most professing Christians observe Christmas, Easter and Halloween, yet fail to observe the very days that the Bible clearly commands? Does it make that much difference which days we keep? Does it affect our hope for eternal life? And does it...
Read More...
The Middle East in Prophecy

    Richard F. Ames

Jerusalem is the most important city in the world. Scripture shows that the region surrounding it—the Middle East—will eventually explode into world war. Do you know what the Bible teaches about the end-time climax of world events in the region?...
Read More...
The Real God: Proofs and Promises

    Douglas S. Winnail

Why is the God of the universe not real to most people today? Why is there so much skepticism and doubt about God? If you have ever pondered these questions, the answers could change your life! In this booklet we will examine the sources of modern...
Read More...
The Ten Commandments

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Today's "modern" society is in conflict over the Ten Commandments. Have they been "done away" by divine fiat or by mankind's march toward scientific knowledge? Should they be displayed in public places, or reserved for the church? Are they a burden...
Read More...
The United States and Great Britain in Prophecy

    John H. Ogwyn (1949–2005)

Prove it straight from your Bible's own pages What's really on the horizon for the world's English-speaking peoples Is it possible that end-time prophecies ignore the U.S., Great Britain and other British-descended people? Does Britain's exit...
Read More...
The World Ahead: What Will It Be Like?

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

God's government is coming to this earth soon! How will it affect you?  What is the real future for which you should be preparing?
Read More...
Twelve Keys to Answered Prayer

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Have you ever wondered, "Why doesn't God answer my prayers?" Do you know how to pray in a way that will get real results?
Read More...
What Is a True Christian?

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

More than 400 sects and denominations call themselves "Christian"—but they all have some basic, and often fundamental, differences. Would Jesus Christ recognize the organizations using His name today? How can you be sure what a true Christian should...
Read More...
Where Is God's True Church Today?

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Thousands of different denominations claim to be following Jesus Christ. Yet they teach thousands of different "gospels" and disagree on countless points of doctrine. Is Jesus Christ the Head of all these denominations? Is Christ divided? Or is...
Read More...
Which Day Is The Christian Sabbath?

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Here is an absolutely VITAL subject that is far more important than most people even begin to realize!  It has everything to do with whether or not you really "know" the true God—the Creator. In fact, it directly affects your inheriting everlasting...
Read More...
Who or What Is the Antichrist?

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Can you prove, from the Bible, who or what the prophesied Antichrist really is? This is not some esoteric topic. Your correct understanding may affect whether or not you will be able to fulfill the role that God has planned for you in His kingdom!
Read More...
Your Ultimate Destiny

    Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017)

Why were you born? Why does God allow even dedicated Christians to go through years and decades of trials, tests and persecutions? Why is it so important that we all "overcome"? What is the magnificent purpose for all our lives here on planet Earth?
Read More...

    Home
        TELECAST
        TV/RADIO LOG
        ABOUT
        CONTACT US
        DONATIONS
        HOLY DAY CALENDAR
        ORDER & SUBSCRIBE
        TW PRESENTATIONS
        OUR APPS
        TWNow Webcasts
        PODCASTS
        SOCIAL SITES
    PUBLICATIONS
        EMAIL SUBSCRIPTIONS
        BOOKLETS
        COMMENTARY
        MAGAZINE
        NEWS AND PROPHECY
        PAMPHLETS
        WOMAN TO WOMAN
        BIBLE STUDY COURSE
    INTERNATIONAL
        Le Monde de Demain
        El Mundo de Mañana
        Die Welt von Morgen
        Wereld van Morgen
        Wereld van More
        O Mundo de Amanhã
‎        عالم الغد
        明日世界
‎        עולם המחר
        कल विश्ि
        Мир завтра
        Dunia wa Kesho

Tomorrow's World

    Facebook icon
    Twitter icon
    YouTube icon
    Instagram icon
    mobile apps icon

© 2019 Tomorrow's World - Privacy Policy

Sponsored By: Living Church of God
We use cookies to improve your experience of our website. For more information on how this website uses cookies and instructions on how to disable them, please click here to view our Cookie Policy. By continuing to use this website, you are consenting to the website's use of cookies.
Got It!
Home

Español Français

Facebook iconTwitter iconYouTube icon

    CONNECT
        ABOUT COMMENTS ORDER FREE DONATIONS 
    READ
        BIBLE STUDY COURSE BOOKLETS COMMENTARY MAGAZINE 
    WATCH
        TELECAST TV LOG TWNOW VIEWPOINT 

    Home Read Booklets The Bible: Fact or Fiction?

The Bible: Fact or Fiction?
Douglas S. Winnail
Comment on this Booklet

Audio Player
We use cookies to improve your experience of our website. For more information on how this website uses cookies and instructions on how to disable them, please click here to view our Cookie Policy. By continuing to use this website, you are consenting to the website's use of cookies. Got It! Home Español Français Facebook iconTwitter iconYouTube icon CONNECT ABOUT COMMENTS ORDER FREE DONATIONS READ BIBLE STUDY COURSE BOOKLETS COMMENTARY MAGAZINE WATCH TELECAST TV LOG TWNOW VIEWPOINT Home Read Booklets The Bible: Fact or Fiction? The Bible: Fact or Fiction? Douglas S. Winnail Comment on this Booklet Audio Player 00:00 00:00 Use Up/Down Arrow keys to increase or decrease volume. Download Audio MP3 Is the Bible just a collection of myths and legends, or is it the inspired word of God? Many assume that modern scholarship has discredited the Bible, but the facts of history — and the discoveries of archaeology — confirm its contents to be true! The Bible recounts the past with amazing accuracy — and it predicts the future like no other book! Most of the world has been misled and misinformed about the Bible. You need to understand the truth — and how it can affect your life! Chapter 1 What Do You Believe About the Bible? Is the Bible really the inspired word of God? Was it accurately preserved for thousands of years as a unique revelation from the Creator of the universe? Or is it just a collection of humanly devised myths and fables? Do we even have the right books in the Bible, or are important sources missing that would change our view of God, Jesus Christ and Christianity? Can we trust Scripture? Is the Bible vital and relevant today? Discovering the truth about the Bible could prove to be one of the most important and exciting adventures you have ever embarked upon. Although critics attack the Bible, and preachers ignore or gloss over many of its teachings, the Bible contains a dimension of knowledge that is almost totally missing from our modern world. The Bible reveals the true purpose of life. Bible prophecies not only foretold the rise and fall of ancient nations; they also explain the real significance of world events making headlines today and where those events are heading. In spite of what millions have been led to believe, the Bible is much more than a pious devotional book or an incense-shrouded source of comfort for the troubled and bereaved! Today, many educated people assume that science and modern scholarship have thoroughly discredited the Bible. This assumption thrives because so many know so little about the Bible. Many people today are simply unaware of discoveries that continue to confirm the historical accuracy of Scripture. Instead, people are encouraged to believe that all religions are equally credible—or equally fanciful—without ever comparing the sourcebooks of those religions. As a result, millions are unaware of how the Bible is unique, and what amazing features distinguish it from all other religious books. Before you accept the idea that the Bible is "just like any other book," you need to examine the evidence for yourself. That evidence is eye-opening and extremely informative, and it could change your life! You need to understand why so many today doubt the Bible's credibility, and what the truth about the Bible can mean to your future. A Change in Attitude For thousands of years, Jews and Christians believed, and died for believing, that the Bible was the inspired word of an Almighty God. Down through the ages, antagonists and skeptics have challenged, attacked and ridiculed the Bible. Popes and pagan Roman emperors attempted to destroy Scripture, and even altered its words. Yet, during these same turbulent centuries, the Bible was carefully preserved and its message spread in remarkable ways! The Bible is surely the most influential book ever written. It has been translated into more languages than any other piece of literature. More than two billion people alive today embrace, at least nominally, its teachings. Even so, many do not realize how profoundly the Bible has influenced the course of all Western civilization. Millions do not understand that biblical laws and teachings provided the basis for social values and legal systems throughout the Western world for centuries. Sir Isaac Newton, one of the most brilliant minds of his century, remarked, "There are more sure marks of authenticity in the Bible than in any profane history." Britain's Queen Victoria said of the Bible, "That book accounts for the supremacy of England." U.S. president Andrew Jackson stated, "That book, sir, is the rock on which our republic stands." U.S. president George Washington commented, "It is impossible to govern the world without God and the Bible." France's Napoleon observed, "The Bible is no mere book, but a Living Creature, with a power that conquers all who oppose it" (Halley's Bible Handbook, pp. 18–19). Yet much has changed since these statements were made. Today, Bibles can be found in far-flung corners of the globe. But in Western nations founded on biblical principles, there has been a steep decline in respect for the Bible. There is a pervading notion that the Bible is just another book, and that its teachings are archaic, outdated and irrelevant to our modern lives. Many seriously doubt that God inspired Scripture. Millions who live in nations that once learned to read from the Bible, and sent Bible-toting missionaries around the world, cannot even name books in the Bible or explain basic biblical doctrines. Surveys done in recent decades show that even many professing Christians have little real knowledge about the Bible. Coinage in the U.S. proclaims, "In God We Trust." Yet recent legislation and judicial decisions have made it illegal in the U.S. to display the Ten Commandments in public buildings, or for students to pray in school! What has produced such a profound shift in attitudes toward the Bible in the very nations that once professed strong belief in Scripture? Why do millions now doubt that God inspired the Bible? Why are billions searching everywhere else for answers found clearly in the Bible? Why do people fail to recognize that the Bible contains prophecies clearly revealing the course of world history, and even the future of specific nations? Why have modern generations chosen to ignore a book that reveals essential details about the future and explains the way to peace and the ultimate purpose for human existence? Why has such vital information remained hidden from so many today? The answers to these important questions read like a novel laced with danger, intrigue and adventure. You will be surprised by information about the Bible that is readily available, yet has largely gone unappreciated or been ignored. You will be shocked to learn how power-seeking religious leaders have twisted Scripture to support misguided and anti-biblical doctrines. The more you learn about Scripture, the more you will realize that you can believe the Bible, because it has been inspired and preserved by a real God who is alive today! The Bible is firmly based on the facts of history, not on myth and fiction. The evidence presented in this booklet will make this clear. The Challenge of Scripture Many today assume that to believe the Bible, you must ignore the facts of science and history and just proceed on "blind faith." Some believers relish the old saying, "God said it. I believe it. That settles it"—but this does not fit well with the skepticism that dominates our age. Others want to ignore what Scripture plainly states, and invent ways to "harmonize" the Bible with modern preferences. Many theologians teach that the Bible is only authoritative when it speaks of broad spiritual principles, and suggest that details of science or history in Scripture are merely the untrustworthy additions of human writers. This desire to accommodate the Bible to the modern world is reflected in an October 2005 document issued by Roman Catholic bishops from England, Scotland and Wales. In "The Gift of Scripture," the bishops warned that while they consider the Bible true in passages regarding salvation, "we should not expect total accuracy from the Bible in other matters… We should not expect to find in Scripture full scientific accuracy or complete historical accuracy." Even so, the bishops profess respect for Scripture, telling their flock: "We have rediscovered the Bible as a precious treasure, both ancient and ever new." These double-minded statements reflect the mindset of many theologians today, who say they respect the Bible but deny its authority. When religious leaders urge people to believe in a book that cannot be trusted on many topics, it is not surprising that church attendance in many countries has fallen off dramatically in recent decades. The plain teachings of the Bible, however, stand in striking contrast to what many religious leaders preach today. The Apostle Paul did not encourage first century Christians to "just believe" in Jesus and merely accept the teachings of the Bible and Christianity "on faith." Instead, he told his audiences, "Test all things; hold fast what is good" (1 Thessalonians 5:21). Paul urged people to check into the facts and believe what they could prove to be true! His admonition reflects Old Testament passages where God challenged the ancient Israelites to "prove Me now… if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it" (Malachi 3:8–10, KJV). God urged Israel to put His promises to the test, and promised that He would bless them, to prove that He was real and that His promises were true! Paul knew that true religious belief involves evidence, assurance and certainty, not "blind faith." He wrote that "faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen" (Hebrews 11:1). According to the Bible, faith should rest on solid evidence, not just warm, fuzzy, emotional feelings in your heart. You should never believe something in spite of the facts, and that includes believing in the authenticity and authority of the Bible! The Apostle Peter emphasized the credibility of Scripture and of the Christian message when he wrote: "For we did not follow cunningly devised fables when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of His majesty" (2 Peter 1:16). Peter also warned his readers to "be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets" because "scoffers will come in the last days" questioning and ridiculing Scripture, "saying, 'where is the promise of His coming?'" (2 Peter 3:1–9). Peter challenged prevailing misconceptions about Scripture; he did not try to water down fundamental scriptural teaching. The Bible clearly reveals that the apostolic writers were advocates of Scripture, and of the teachings of the Christian faith! They knew that they were preaching the truth! Their approach followed the example of their teacher, Jesus Christ. The New Testament shows that Christ's manner of preaching surprised His audiences. "And so it was, when Jesus had ended these sayings, that the people were astonished at His teaching, for He taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes" (Matthew 7:28–29). The contents of Scripture can be verified by the facts of history and the discoveries of modern science and archaeology. What is more, the Bible provides answers to life's big questions. Not only do the hundreds of detailed Bible prophecies accurately reveal the future course of world events; they set the Bible apart from all other religious books! The Bible provides a dimension of knowledge that is simply not available from any other source. With so much evidence available, the real question that we face today is simply whether or not we can believe the Bible. As you read this booklet, you will see that the answer is, "Yes, we can!" Chapter 2 Prophecy: The Bible's Unique Dimension Many assume that all religions are equally credible, that religious people all worship the same God and that the holy books of various religions are of equal value. Yet nothing could be further from the truth! Scholars confidently claim that no one can predict the future with assurance—and that only fools try! However, these assertions overlook or ignore the incredible phenomenon of Bible prophecy, which distinguishes the Bible from any other book that has ever been written. The God of the Bible claims that He can predict the future and bring it to pass! The Bible contains hundreds of prophecies that have come true, and are confirmed by history. The Bible also contains dozens of prophecies that are coming alive today! Bible prophecies explain the real significance of global events making headlines today. Bible prophecies also reveal what is ahead for major nations of our modern world—and for the human race! No other book, religious or secular, does this with such accuracy and detail! Prophecy is clearly the Bible's most striking feature! Notice this amazing statement by Dr. Gleason Archer, a renowned Old Testament scholar: "The Holy Bible is like no other book in all the world. It is the only book which represents itself as the written revelation of the one true God, intended for the salvation of man, and demonstrating its divine authority by many infallible proofs. Other religious documents, such as the Muhammadan Koran, may claim to be the very word of God, but they contain no such self-authenticating proofs as does the Bible (for example, the phenomena of fulfilled prophecy)" (A Survey of Old Testament Introduction, Archer, p. 9). Another authoritative source notes: "One of the strongest evidences that the Bible is inspired by God is its predictive prophecy. Unlike any other book, the Bible offers a multitude of specific predictions—some hundreds of years in advance—that have been literally fulfilled or else point to a definite future time when they will come true" (Geisler, p. 609). Old Testament professor Milton C. Fisher recognizes a "sharp distinction between prophetism in Israel and the outwardly similar phenomenon in surrounding cultures… both the type of message and the writings of Israel's prophets is without parallel" (The Origin of the Bible, Bruce, pp. 105–106). Another scholar has noted that "the Bible… is the most remarkable volume that has ever been produced in some five thousand years… it is the only volume that has ever been produced by men, or a group of men, in which is to be found a large body of prophecies relating to individual nations, to Israel, to all the peoples of the earth, to certain cities, and to the coming One who was to be the Messiah. The ancient world had many different devices for determining the future, known as divination, but not in the entire gamut of Greek and Latin literature… can we find any real specific prophecy of a great historic event to come in the distant future, nor any prophecy of a Savior to arise in the human race" (Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, p. 22). These are absolutely remarkable statements that clearly recognize the unique nature of Bible prophecy! The Challenge of Prophecy Being able to predict the future accurately and consistently is simply not a human trait. Even the best strategic planners acknowledge that detailed prediction of future events—especially geopolitical events—is difficult in the short term, and practically impossible in the long term, at least at any level of detail. Yet the Bible repeatedly predicts the rise and fall of prominent individuals, nations and empires with amazing accuracy and in remarkable detail! Bible scholars have determined that more than one quarter of the Bible—about 27 percent—is devoted to prophecy, and that the Bible contains more than 1,800 predictions, many of which are very specific. Hundreds of specific prophecies, given centuries before their exact fulfillment, are undeniable evidence that an all-powerful God is alive and in control of future events! Scripture makes this plain when the God of the Bible challenges skeptics to predict the future and bring it to pass! Through the pen of the prophet Isaiah, God thunders: "Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that you are gods… indeed you are nothing, and your work is nothing; he who chooses you is an abomination" (Isaiah 41:23–24). And again: "Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is none like Me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times things that are not yet done, saying, 'My counsel shall stand, and I will do my pleasure'" (Isaiah 46:9–10). These verses boldly state that no human being can predict the future and bring it to pass on the scale that the God of the Bible claims He can—and has, and will! This unique capacity to predict the future accurately sets the Bible apart from any other piece of literature. Bible scholars recognize: "Other books claim divine inspiration, such as the Koran, the Book of Mormon, and parts of the [Hindu] Veda. But none of these books contains predictive prophecy. As a result, fulfilled prophecy is a strong indication of the unique, divine authority of the Bible" (The New Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, p. 13). Bible prophecy stands in marked contrast to human attempts to predict the future. A study of 25 top-rated psychics discovered that 92 percent of their predictions were totally wrong, and that chance or general knowledge of circumstances could explain the remaining 8 percent that were accurate (Geisler, p. 615). Anyone familiar with the so-called prophecies of Nostradamus (Michael de Nostredame), the 16th century French psychic who dabbled in astrology, alchemy and other occult practices, is aware that his vague and nebulous verses simply do not compare to biblical prophecies. Specific prophecies, given centuries before they were accurately and consistently fulfilled, are some of the most stunning proofs that the Bible is the inspired word of God! Hundreds of Prophecies About Jesus Christ! Some of the Bible's most striking examples of fulfilled prophecies are those that accurately foretold specific details about the life, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, centuries before He was born! More than 200 prophecies, written centuries before His birth, foretold specific events in His life that were fulfilled to the letter. He would be born of a virgin and named Immanuel (Isaiah 7:14; Matthew 1:23), in Bethlehem (Micah 5:2; Matthew 2:3–8). He would be a descendant of David (Matthew 1:1; 22:42–45). He would sojourn in Egypt (Hosea 11:1; Matthew 2:13–15). His birth would prompt a massacre of children (Jeremiah 31:15; Matthew 2:16–18). He would live in Galilee (Isaiah 9:1–2; Matthew 2:19–23). He would enter Jerusalem on a donkey (Zechariah 9:9; Matthew 21:1–5). He would die with transgressors and be buried in the tomb of a rich man (Isaiah 53:9, 12). He would be resurrected after three days (Matthew 12:40; Jonah 1:17). The remarkable fulfillment of hundreds of specific predictions, recorded centuries earlier in the Hebrew Scriptures, demonstrates beyond any reasonable doubt that Jesus was the prophesied Messiah of the Bible and the Son of God. It should be noted that "Mohammedanism cannot point to any prophecies of the coming of Mohammed uttered hundreds of years before his birth. Neither can the founders of any cult… rightly identify any ancient text specifically foretelling their appearance" (McDowell, p. 22). Some Muslim scholars cite Old Testament verses that they say prophesied Muhammad (Deuteronomy 18:15–18), but it was Jesus Christ who actually fulfilled those prophecies (see Matthew 21:11; Luke 1:76; 24:19; Acts 3:18–22) more than 600 years before Muhammad was born! The Bible's prophecies about Jesus Christ are unique among religious writings. Cities and Kings The Bible contains more than 1,500 prophecies that foretell in remarkable detail the future of prominent cities, kings and kingdoms. Fulfilled prophecies about the ancient Phoenician city of Tyre stand as a sobering testimony to the power and accuracy of Bible prophecy. When Ezekiel recorded his prophecies (around 585bc), Tyre was one of the great cities of the ancient world. It was situated on an island at the center of a maritime trading network that controlled Mediterranean commerce. Tyre was a wealthy emporium of goods, surrounded by 150-foot-high walls that were considered impregnable. The Bible reports that Tyre's citizens rejoiced when Nebuchadnezzar and his Babylonian army conquered Jerusalem; they anticipated gaining access to valuable inland trade routes passing through Jerusalem. In response, God delivered a series of specific prophecies of Tyre's future devastation. Ezekiel wrote that, "because Tyre has said against Jerusalem, 'Aha! She is broken who was the gateway of the peoples'… Therefore thus says the Lord God: 'Behold, I am against you, O Tyre, and will cause many nations to come up against you, as the sea causes its waves to come up. And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre and break down her towers; I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock. It shall be a place for spreading nets in the midst of the sea… they will lay your stones, your timber, and your soil in the midst of the water… you shall never be rebuilt, for I the Lord have spoken, says the Lord God'" (Ezekiel 26:2–14). To appreciate the power and scope of Ezekiel's prophecies, picture someone trying to predict what will happen to New York or London over the next 2,500 years! Yet history records how Ezekiel's predictions have come to pass. In 585bc, Nebuchadnezzar began a 13-year siege against Tyre. His was the first of many nations that would come like waves against Tyre. Around 530bc, the Persians gained control of Tyre. In 332bc, Alexander destroyed the mainland portion of Tyre and threw the debris into the sea to build a causeway for assaulting the island city. When Alexander conquered the island fortress of Tyre, he battered down the walls and reduced the city to ruins. As Phoenician specialist Glenn Markoe wrote, "The conquest of Alexander… marked the beginning of the end for Tyre and Phoenicia… Tyre would soon recover commercially… yet it would never fully reclaim the pride of place it had enjoyed" (Phoenicians, Markoe, p. 61). Greeks and Romans later dominated what remained of the city. In 638ad, Muslim armies captured Tyre. Crusaders recaptured the city in 1124, and used it as a staging area for military operations. In 1291, the Muslims retook Tyre and laid it in ruins, "after which she never again regained any importance" (Geisler, p. 870). Today, there is a small fishing village near the ruins of the once proud city of Tyre, but the city's ancient power and splendor, and its extensive trade network, are gone. The site of one of the wealthiest cities in the ancient world has become "a place for spreading nets," just as the Bible predicted. The Bible contains prophecies about other cities near Tyre that would have a bloody history but a different future. Sidon, an idol-worshiping Phoenician city about 20 miles north of Tyre, was noted for artistic metalwork and fine cloth. Bible prophecies reveal that Sidon would have a bloody history and suffer from pestilence, but would come to "know that I am the Lord" (Ezekiel 28:21–23). Nowhere did God prophesy total destruction or oblivion for Sidon. History records that the Assyrians destroyed Sidon in 678bc, but the city was rebuilt, and it submitted to Nebuchadnezzar after suffering from a devastating pestilence. Persians burned the city in about 351bc. Syria and Egypt fought over Sidon, and it became a free city under Roman rule. The Bible indicates that Jesus may have visited Sidon (Matthew 15:21) and that Sidonians heard Jesus preach the gospel (Mark 3:7–8). The Apostle Paul also visited Sidon (Acts 27:3). Today, modern Sidon is known for its gardens and orange groves. Bible prophecy outlined a very different future for Tyre's sister city Sidon—and it came to pass, just as Scripture predicted! Around 700bc, the prophet Isaiah recorded several specific prophecies about the downfall of the Babylonian Empire and the destruction of the city of Babylon (see Isaiah 13; 14). At the time of Isaiah's prophecy, Babylon was subject to the Assyrians and would not become a major power for another hundred years. Yet Isaiah foresaw the future glory that Babylon would achieve under Nebuchadnezzar with its Hanging Gardens, magnificent palaces, luxurious living, massive walls and military conquests. Isaiah also foresaw the Medes' destruction of Babylon, and the city's ultimate desolation, several hundred years in advance! Isaiah's prophecies foretold: "The burden against Babylon… I will stir up the Medes against them… And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldeans' pride, will be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It will never be inhabited, nor will it be settled from generation to generation; nor will the Arabian pitch tents there… but wild beasts of the desert will lie there… her days will not be prolonged" (Isaiah 13:1–22). History records that these prophecies were fulfilled: "In 539 [bc] Babylon fell to the Medes and Persians... Xerxes destroyed the city in 478, and it was finally abandoned in the 4th century bc" (Eerdmans' Handbook of the Bible, p. 382). The Chosen People Some of the Bible's most amazing and surprising prophecies deal with the descendants of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob—the twelve tribes of Israel, whom God chose to use for a special purpose (Exodus 19:1–6). God promised Abram (Abraham) that in return for obedience, his descendants would become great and be a blessing to the world (Genesis 12:1–3). Later prophecies stated that Jacob's descendants through Manasseh and Ephraim would ultimately become a "great" nation, and a great "multitude [company, commonwealth] of nations," who, along with the other descendants of Jacob, would in Bible prophecy be called Israelites (Genesis 48:14–22). In the Bible, the terms Israel and Israelite generally apply to the descendants of all twelve of Jacob's sons. The Jews are the descendants of Judah, who was just one of Jacob's sons. In a more specific sense, Israel applies to the descendants of the ten tribes that made up the nation of Israel (with its capital in Samaria), which broke away from the nation of Judah (with its capital in Jerusalem) when the kingdom of Solomon was divided (see 1 Kings 12). This biblical distinction between the Jews and the other Israelite nations is an important key to understanding Bible prophecy. Genesis 49 contains a remarkable series of prophecies foretelling how the Israelites—descendants of Jacob's twelve sons—will be recognized "in the last days." Reuben will become powerful and have notions of grandeur, but will lack national stability; consider how this description could describe France. Judah (the Jews) will provide the Messiah and retain knowledge of the Law of God. Zebulun will dwell by the sea and become a mercantile people; a description evocative of modern Holland. Dan will leave its mark, having traveled from its base in the Middle East; a description evocative of Denmark and Ireland. Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh) will become a colonizing people dwelling in the choice places of the earth—and dwelling "separate from his brothers"—a description perfectly apt to describe the former British Commonwealth nations and the U.S. (see Genesis 49:22–26). These remarkable prophecies were not to be fulfilled only by the Jews—to whom the world gives the name "Israel"—but also by eleven other nations that are part of the "whole house" of Israel. These prophecies reveal keys to the identity and location of the modern descendants of Jacob's twelve sons—the children of Israel. For a more detailed discussion of this topic, please request our free booklet, The United States and Great Britain in Prophecy. Understanding the true identity of the Israelite nations is not only a key for understanding Bible prophecy; this knowledge is also essential for God's Church, which must fulfill the commission that Jesus gave. Jesus commissioned His disciples to "go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel"—to preach about the coming kingdom of God, and warn the Israelites about terrible trials they would face in the last days because of their disobedience to God's laws (see Jeremiah 30:7–24). Jesus' disciples took this commission seriously. In their day, the tribes of Israel were not "lost." The Apostle James addressed his epistle "to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad" (James 1:1). Josephus revealed that in the days of the apostles, "ten tribes are beyond the Euphrates… and are an immense multitude" (Antiquities of the Jews, Book XI, 5, 2). This explains why several of the apostles, including Peter and Andrew, traveled in that direction. Historical sources also indicate that Peter, Paul and others traveled to Western Europe and Britain preaching the gospel. The clear implication of these leading apostles' journeys to the West is that Israelite peoples were there! Examine the history of ancient Ireland, and notice which Israelite tribal name appears in the records. When you study the Genesis 49 prophecies about the characteristics and future history of Jacob's descendants, you will notice the connection with peoples that currently reside in, or emigrated from, northwest Europe! When you understand the identities of modern Israelite nations, you can begin to understand from Bible prophecy what lies ahead for these nations—and for other nations mentioned in Bible prophecy! The Future of Nations Bible prophecies are not just about ancient history. The book of Daniel contains detailed yet sweeping prophecies that provide an outline of history from the time of Nebuchadnezzar's Babylon through the return of Jesus Christ at the end of the age. Modern critics, seeking to discredit the prophetic and supernatural elements in the book of Daniel, have revived ideas put forward by Porphyrius, a third-century pagan philosopher from Tyre. Porphyrius (also called Porphyry) claimed that the book of Daniel was a fraudulent work produced in the second century bc, after the events it recounts had already taken place! However, this theory does not square with the facts. The book of Daniel gives precise dates, locations and names that can be verified. The prophet Ezekiel was a contemporary of Daniel, and mentioned him very respectfully (Ezekiel 14:20). The book of Daniel was widely accepted as inspired, and was included in the Hebrew Bible in the second century bc. Jesus acknowledged Daniel as the author of the book (Matthew 24:15). One respected source notes: "In NT prophecy Daniel is referred to more than any other book in the OT. Moreover, it contains more fulfilled prophecies than any other book in the Bible" (see The Expositor's Bible Commentary, vol. 7, p. 3). Daniel recorded a dream about a huge image (Daniel 2). The four parts of the image—head, chest, belly and thighs, legs and feet—pictured four empires that would arise in the future to dominate the Mediterranean world. Bible scholars now recognize these empires as the Babylonian Empire, the Medo-Persian Empire, the Greco-Macedonian Empire under Alexander the Great and the Roman Empire. Daniel also revealed that Jesus Christ will strike the last remnant of the Roman Empire on its feet and toes (made of iron and clay) when He returns to set up His kingdom on this earth at the end of this age (Daniel 2:41–45). Daniel described the same four empires as four beasts, and gave additional details about each. The third empire (Greco-Macedonian under Alexander) was pictured with four heads (Daniel 7:6). History records that after Alexander's death, his empire split into four parts, about 300 years after Daniel recorded the prophecy. Daniel described the fourth beast (the Roman Empire) as having ten horns representing "ten kings who shall arise from this kingdom" (Daniel 7:7, 24). History records the many attempts to continue or revive the Roman Empire down through the centuries. They have all occurred in Europe, including revivals under Charlemagne, Charles V of the Hapsburgs, Napoleon and Mussolini. According to Bible prophecy, the final revival will be lead by a person labeled "the beast," backed by a religious leader called the "false prophet" (see Revelation 13 and 17). For more information about these end-time prophetic developments, please request our free booklet, The Beast of Revelation. Daniel also mentions a "little horn" that will disown the first three attempts to continue the Roman Empire, but will be intimately involved with subsequent revivals of the Roman Empire in its various forms. This figure is prophesied as speaking "pompous words against the Most High… persecute the saints… [and] change times and law" (Daniel 7:8, 20, 24–25). This "little horn" foreshadows those religious leaders who have claimed to be the "vicar of Christ" (meaning "in place of Christ"), who murdered Bible-believing Christians through an Inquisition and who replaced commanded biblical Holy Days with pagan holidays. Other prophecies identify this "little horn" as a prominent religious figure whose latter-day counterpart will play a key role in events leading to Jesus Christ's return (2 Thessalonians 2; Revelation 13; 17). The ten toes of Daniel's image (Daniel 2:40–43) correspond to ten kings who will give their power and authority to "the beast," a powerful and deceptive political leader who will emerge on the scene in Europe just before Jesus Christ returns at the end of the age (Revelation 17:1–13). This political leader will receive support from, and be influenced by, a powerful religious leader—the final manifestation of the "little horn." Like his predecessors, this "little horn" will play a key role in world politics (Revelation 13; 17). History records that Roman Catholic popes have crowned the emperors of the Holy Roman Empire, and that popes and bishops have long influenced European politics. The iron and clay of the ten toes of Daniel's image foretells the attempts by squabbling European nations to form a union by surrendering their sovereignty to a central government (akin to what the E.U. has done in Brussels). Current attempts to create a united Europe modeled on the old Roman Empire have been backed by several popes and the Roman Church. Daniel and other books of the Bible indicate that the final fulfillment of these remarkable prophecies will occur in the years just ahead! It is ironic that while these ancient and detailed prophecies are coming alive today, leaders of the Roman Church insist that the symbolic language used in Daniel and Revelation "is not to be interpreted literally. We should not expect to discover in this book [Revelation] details about the end of the world" (The Times, October 5, 2005)—yet that is exactly what these prophetic books claim to reveal! Today, for people who really want to understand where world events are leading, the challenge is: Whom do you believe, theologians or the Bible? This is why it is important to determine whether or not the Bible is truly the word of God—whether it is fact or fiction! The End of the World Sadly, modern skeptics—and even many who claim to believe in Jesus Christ—dismiss ideas about the end of the age as pure fantasy and wild-eyed doomsday talk. Yet the Bible takes a linear view of history, and pictures all events moving toward a climax. The prophecies in Daniel take this view, with the climax being Jesus Christ's return to establish the kingdom of God on this earth. Jesus spoke freely and in detail about specific events that would signal the end of the age. When Jesus' disciples asked Him, "what will be the sign of your coming, and of the end of the age" He did not beat around the bush or try to avoid answering the question, as many theologians do today (Matthew 24:3). He told His disciples to watch for a time when they would see widespread religious confusion and deception, and increasingly frequent reports of violence, wars, ethnic strife, famines, disease epidemics and natural disasters on a global scale (Matthew 24:4–7). These are the very headlines dominating our news today! Yet Jesus said that this would be just the "beginning of sorrows" (Matthew 24:8). Christ went on to reveal that there will be a global persecution of Christians, but that the true gospel of the coming kingdom of God will nevertheless "be preached in all the world as a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come" (Matthew 24:14). Jesus said that all these events leading up to the climax of this age will occur at a time in history when the very existence of life on this planet will be threatened. Notice Jesus' description that "unless those days were shortened [by Jesus' return], no flesh would be saved; but for the elect's sake those days will be shortened" (Matthew 24:22). Jesus admonished His disciples to watch—to remain alert—so that they will recognize when the civilizations of this world are entering their final hour (Matthew 24:36–44; 25:1–13; Mark 13:32–37; Luke 21:34–38). In the 1950s, world leaders first realized that, with the development of nuclear weapons, mankind has created the capacity to destroy all life from the face of the earth. This was never possible until the last half of the 20th century! Is it just a coincidence that between 1950 and today we have seen the global spread of HIV-AIDS, the return of drug-resistant tuberculosis and the threat of international pandemics of bird flu and other infectious diseases? Is it just a coincidence that today we are concerned with the emerging threat of global warming and the sobering consequences of global climate change? Is it just a coincidence that all this is happening amid rising fears about international terrorism and escalating conflict in the Middle East—all of which Scripture predicted long ago? Is this all coincidence, or are we seeing the approaching fulfillment of ancient Bible prophecies that describe in detail the end of the age? These astoundingly accurate prophecies distinguish the Bible from any other book on this planet, and they offer proof that the Bible was written by "the finger of God." Chapter 3 Did God Inspire the Bible? One of the Bible's most striking features is that it plainly claims to be the inspired word of an Almighty God. We see this in the words of the Apostle Paul, a highly educated Hebrew who wrote, "All Scripture is given by inspiration of God" (2 Timothy 3:16). The Apostle Peter wrote that the content of Scripture "never came by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit" (2 Peter 1:21). To early Church leaders, "inspiration was not an ecstatic overpowering of the writer's consciousness, but rather a high degree of illumination and calm awareness of God's revelation… extending to every word of Scripture" (The Origin of the Bible, Bruce, et al., p. 38). Scripture indicates, and the early Church recognized, that God inspired the biblical writers to use their own minds and their own styles to write what God wanted them to write. The Bible describes the process of divine inspiration in the way God worked with Moses, "And God spoke all these words… And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord… when Moses had completed writing the words of this law in a book… Moses commanded the Levites… Take this Book of the Law, and put it beside the ark of the covenant" (Exodus 20:1; 24:4; Deuteronomy 31:24–26). Centuries later, Ezra and Nehemiah read to the people of Israel from the "Book of the Law of Moses," which was also called "the Book of the Law of God" (Nehemiah 8:1, 18). Jesus acknowledged its divine inspiration when He said, "have you not read in the book of Moses… how God spoke to him" (Mark 12:26). The prophet Jeremiah recorded a similar experience: "The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, 'Thus speaks the Lord God of Israel, saying: Write in a book for yourself all the words that I have spoken to you" (Jeremiah 30:1–2). The phrase, "Thus says the Lord" is used more than 350 times in the Old Testament, clearly implying that the words of Scripture came from God. As we will see, other religious books may claim divine inspiration like the Bible, yet they lack the specific characteristics that confirm the Bible's authenticity. Not only does the Bible claim to be divinely inspired, it claims to be the ultimate source of truth, revealed by the one true God. The Apostle John wrote, "Thy word is truth" (John 17:17, KJV). David wrote, "Your law is truth… all Your commandments are truth... The entirety of Your word is truth" (Psalm 119:142, 151, 160). The prophet Isaiah asserted, "To the law and to the testimony! If they do not speak according to this word, it is because there is no light in them" (Isaiah 8:20). Isaiah meant that if statements and ideas do not agree with Scripture, we can recognize them as false. The Apostle Paul also calls Scripture "the word of truth" (2 Timothy 2:15). These statements stand in marked contrast to the uncertain words spoken by Pontius Pilate, "What is truth?" (John 18:38). Today, many skeptics and cynics share Pilate's question. Yet the Bible's bold claims show that its writers clearly believed that the words they recorded were absolutely true and inspired by a wise and all-powerful God (see Genesis 17:1; Psalm 86:10; Jude 1:25). What is truth? You need to prove that for yourself! The Bible repeatedly emphasizes, "the Lord is the true God" (Jeremiah 10:10; see also John 17:3; 1 Thessalonians 1:9; 1 John 5:20). Scripture records that when the ancient Egyptian priests saw the miracles announced by Moses, and saw their own gods powerless, they concluded: "This is the finger of God" (Exodus 8:16–19). Daniel records that Nebuchadnezzar, pagan king of Babylon, came to the same conclusion after encountering the God of the Bible: "Truly, your God is the God of gods, the Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets" (Daniel 2:47). The Bible records that the Apostle Paul, distressed at seeing Athens "given over to idols," taught superstitious Greek philosophers about the true God (Acts 17:16–34). For more information about the true God of the Bible, request our free booklet, The Real God: Proofs and Promises. The Bible's clear and unambiguous message is that Scripture is the inspired word of a real God, and is the ultimate source of truth! This is difficult for many today to believe, because we live in a skeptical age where even so-called biblical scholars doubt that the Bible really is God's word. However, the Bible's bold claim that it is the inspired word of an all-powerful God, and is true in its entirety, can be verified in the records of history and the discoveries of archaeology. The evidence is there for anyone willing to look! Critics Challenge the Bible Scripture boldly asserts that "the word of our God stands forever" and "the word of the Lord endures forever" (Isaiah 40:8; 1 Peter 1:25). King David wrote, "His truth endures to all generations" (Psalm 100:5). Yet, down through the centuries, antagonists and critics have tried to undermine, disparage, defy and destroy Scripture, and even mock the God of the Bible. The Bible warns, "Do not be deceived; God is not mocked" (Galatians 6:7). The Old Testament records that during the Assyrian invasion of Judah (ca. 700bc), Sennacherib, a pagan Assyrian king, mocked the God of Israel before king Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem (2 Chronicles 32:9–19). Shortly thereafter, "the Lord sent an angel who cut down every mighty man of valor… in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he [Sennacherib] returned shamefaced to his own land. And when he had gone into the temple of his god, some of his own offspring struck him down with the sword there" (2 Chronicles 32:21–22). Historical records confirm that Sennacherib did not conquer Jerusalem, and that his own sons killed him. Secular history does not explain why this occurred. However, the Bible reveals that dire consequences can arise when doubters and critics mock the real God! Next to the exodus from Egypt, this is one of God's most dramatic interventions in Israel's history, and the facts of secular history support the biblical record. Incidentally, the Greek historian Herodotus relates that Sennacherib also suffered an embarrassing setback, with supernatural overtones, when his army invaded Egypt and a swarm of field mice chewed up their weapons, causing him to flee from the field near Pelusium with heavy losses (The Histories, 2:141). This truth of Scripture—that God will not be mocked—stands confirmed. In the century after the apostles, historical sources confirm that Celsus, an articulate pagan philosopher, created a major stir when he wrote a blistering attack against the Bible and Christianity. Celsus wrote that biblical teachings were "absurd," that the gospel accounts were "a deception" and that anyone who believed in one God was "deluded" (Is the Bible True?, Sheler, p. 9). The Bible survived, and Christianity spread around the world, but few people today have even heard of Celsus! Modern biblical critics who have resurrected Celsus' ideas should remember that his attack on Scripture was answered by an early religious scholar named Origen, whose eight-volume Against Celsus gave a point-by-point rebuttal in defense of the Bible. At the beginning of the 4th century, the Roman emperor Diocletian sought to wipe out the Christian religion. He unleashed a terrible persecution of Christians, and commanded that all Bibles be burned. However, within a few short years a new emperor (Constantine) actually ordered the production of 50 Bibles! During the Middle Ages (ca. 500–1500ad), scholars influenced by pagan philosophy taught that scriptural accounts were merely allegories and should not be taken literally. Their allegorical approach assumed that Bible passages hid a deeper meaning, making the literal meaning unimportant. The Bible survived, but this way of thinking also survives today in many theological schools. The allegorical approach is a very subtle way of undermining the Bible's clear message, because it ignores what the Bible actually says. Secular scholars in the 18th century became enthralled by the apparent power of human reason and the new discoveries of science. Regarding human reason as the ultimate authority, and armed with a bias against the supernatural, these critics began to offer speculative theories about the Bible's supposed origins, apparent contradictions and assumed errors. However, the assumptions and speculations of these critics have not stood the test of time. In fact, some of their bold pronouncements now appear extremely presumptuous and naïve. Toward the end of the 18th century, the French philosopher Voltaire predicted that Christianity would be swept from existence within a century. Yet, 50 years after he died, the Geneva Bible Society produced stacks of Bibles in Voltaire's house on his own press (The New Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, p. 10). The facts of history and the discoveries of archaeology make it plain: secular critics' ill-founded pronouncements and theories are intellectual castles built on hot air. Evidence from Archaeology Over the last 200 years, the rise of biblical criticism spawned many confident assertions by scholars who doubted the inspiration of Scripture. Skeptics at first claimed that since there was no evidence outside the Bible of various people and places mentioned in the Bible, the writers of Scripture must have invented them. This approach found fertile ground in "progressive" schools of theology, and in secular academic circles. The press and media fed these ideas to society, furthering doubts about the Bible's credibility. This doubt and skepticism persists today, even though ongoing archaeological discoveries continue to validate the Bible's historical accuracy, and discredit the skeptics' assumptions! As recently as 1992, some scholars were confidently asserting, "There are no literary criteria for believing David to be more historical than Joshua, Joshua more historical than Abraham, and Abraham more historical than Adam" (see "House of David Built on Sand," Biblical Archaeology Review, July/August 1994, pp. 54–55). Yet, just one year later, archaeologists digging in upper Galilee discovered a 9th century bc inscription about the "house of David." Jeffrey Sheler, an award-winning journalist and a religion writer for U.S. News & World Report, wrote: "The fragmentary reference to David was a historical bombshell. Never before had the familiar name of Judah's ancient warrior king… been found in the records of antiquity outside the pages of the Bible" (Is the Bible True?, p. 60). For decades, critics viewed the biblical story of David and Goliath as a fanciful tale of religious fiction. Yet, recently, "archaeologists digging at the purported biblical home of Goliath [Gath, see 1 Samuel 17:4] have unearthed a shard of pottery bearing an inscription of the Philistine's name, a find they claimed lends historical credence to the Bible's tale of David's battle with the giant" (The London Times, November 13, 2005). This is the oldest Philistine inscription ever discovered, dated to 950bc—within 70 years of the biblical narrative. Doubting scholars for years assumed that "there were no Hittites at the time of Abraham, as there were no records of their existence apart from the Old Testament. They must be a myth" (McDowell, p. 11). However, later "archaeological research… uncovered more than 1,200 years of Hittite civilization" (ibid.). In similar fashion, critics assumed that the biblical patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were fictional figures from Hebrew folklore. Yet cuneiform tablets discovered in the royal archives of the palace of Mari in northern Syria, dating from the start of the second millennium bc (the approximate time of the patriarchs) mention "such names as Abam-ram (Abraham), Jacob-el and Benjamites" (When Skeptics Ask, Geisler & Brooks, pp. 186–187). All these discoveries support the biblical record and refute the charges of critics. Scholars skeptical of the Bible have noted the similarity between the Genesis creation account and Babylonian clay tablets describing the creation of the world. These scholars have glossed over major differences in the accounts, and suggested that biblical writers simply borrowed their material from other sources. However, the discovery of more that 17,000 clay tablets at Ebla (in modern Syria), dating from 2500bc, has overturned the critics' theories. The Ebla tablets (which predate the Babylonian creation epic by some 600 years) contain "the oldest known creation accounts outside the Bible… The creation tablet is strikingly close to that of Genesis, speaking of one being who created the heavens, moon, stars and earth. Parallels show that the Bible contains the older, less embellished version… They [the Ebla tablets] destroy the critical belief in the evolution of monotheism from supposed earlier polytheism" (Baker Encyclopedia of Christian Apologetics, Geisler, p. 208). There have been dozens of other remarkable discoveries. The Merneptah Stela describes an Egyptian pharaoh conquering Israel (ca. 1200bc). The Black Obelisk from Nimrud pictures Israelite king Jehu bowing before Assyrian king Shalmaneser III. An inscription near Jerusalem refers to "Joseph, son of Caiaphas" (Caiaphas was the high priest in Jerusalem at the time of Christ's crucifixion; see Matthew 26:57). An inscribed stone from first century Caesarea reads, "Pontius Pilate, the Prefect of Judea" (Pilate was the Roman governor at the time of Jesus' crucifixion; see Matthew 27:2). Such evidence, carved in stone, supports the conclusion that the Bible writers were recording facts and not fiction (see The Signature of God, Jeffrey, pp. 72–74; Is the Bible True?, Sheler, pp. 110–112). The manner in which archaeology has verified the historical accuracy of the Bible has been nothing short of remarkable! As noted archaeologist Nelson Glueck has written, "it may be clearly stated categorically that no archaeological discovery has ever controverted a single biblical reference. Scores of archaeological findings have been made which confirm in clear outline or exact detail historical statements in the Bible" (Rivers in the Desert, Glueck, p. 136). Glueck's comments echo the words of another prominent archaeologist, William F. Albright, who stated, "There can be no doubt that archaeology has confirmed the substantial historicity of Old Testament tradition… The excessive skepticism shown toward the Bible by important historical schools of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries… has been progressively discredited" (Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, vol. 1, p. 65). The evidence of history and archaeology defies the critics, and supports Scripture! Chapter 4 Has the Bible Been Preserved Accurately? How can we know whether the text of the Bible has been preserved accurately down through the centuries? Is it logical to believe that a book written by more than 40 authors in different locations over 1,500 years can be trustworthy? Can we prove that the text we have today is reliable? If the Bible is the inspired word of an Almighty God who encourages people to "check the facts," we should expect to find convincing evidence that Scripture has been preserved carefully and accurately over time. Such evidence is available—in Scripture itself! Evidence can also be found in Jewish historical literature, in the writings of early Church scholars and in a multitude of modern sources. The evidence for the accurate transmission of the Bible is remarkable, overwhelming and, indeed, irrefutable! Old Testament Preservation The Apostle Paul revealed where to find evidence of Scripture's preservation when he wrote, "What advantage then has the Jew…? to them were committed the oracles of God" (Romans 3:1–2). Biblical scholar Bernard Ramm comments, "The Jews preserved it [the Old Testament] as no other manuscript has ever been preserved" (McDowell, p. 9). When God revealed His laws to their ancestors, they were given a mandate: "You shall not add to the word which I command you, nor take from it… be careful to observe them [the statutes of God]… teach them to your children and your grandchildren" (Deuteronomy 4:1–10). History clearly shows how this has occurred. The Bible records that God gave His laws directly to Moses (ca. 1400bc), and that "when Moses had completed writing the words of this law in a book… Moses commanded the Levites… Take this Book of the Law, and put it beside the ark of the covenant" (Deuteronomy 31:24–26). This ark was a box containing stone tablets of the law carved by God and the writings of Moses (see Deuteronomy 10:5). It was kept in the Tabernacle, and later in the Temple at Jerusalem. The Bible shows Ezra the priest reading and explaining the "Book of the Law of Moses" to Jews who had returned to Jerusalem from Babylon in the fifth century bc (Nehemiah 8:1–12). By 150bc, there is even evidence from extra-biblical sources that the Pentateuch (the first five books of the Old Testament) was attributed to Moses (The Origin of the Bible, Bruce, et al., p. 56). In the first century ad, Jesus and the apostles also quoted from and referred to the books of Moses as inspired Scripture (see Mark 12:19–27; John 1:17; Romans 10:5). Thus, the Bible provides its own account of how Scripture was preserved and used over generations. Canon Vs. Confusion Evidence also exists from the Bible, as well as from historical sources, that the Old Testament consisted of specific books that were widely recognized as divinely inspired. The list of books recognized as inspired became the canon of the Old Testament, the Hebrew Bible. In the first century ad, both Jesus (Luke 24:44) and the Jewish teacher Philo referred to three major divisions of the Old Testament canon: the Law, the Prophets and the Writings (see Bruce, p. 60). Josephus, a first-century Jewish historian, acknowledged that the Hebrew Bible consisted of 22 books—essentially the same text which, divided differently, forms the 39 books of our modern Old Testament—and that these books "have all been accepted as canonical from time immemorial" (ibid., p. 61). The fact that 22 books of the Old Testament and 27 books of the New Testament comprise the 49 books of the complete Bible (49 is considered a number of completion) indicates that a divine mind was guiding this process. The Bible is not just a haphazard collection of books! Modern scholars generally agree that the Hebrew Scriptures were recognized as inspired from an early date. According to one source: "The evidence supports the theory that the Hebrew canon was established well before the late first century ad, more than likely as early as the fourth century bc and certainly no later than 150bc" (McDowell, p. 26). Another source states: "No one doubts that the Pentateuch was both complete and canonical by the time of Ezra and Nehemiah, in the fifth century bc… such evidence implies that by the beginning of the Christian era the identity of all the [Old Testament] canonical books was well known and generally accepted" (The Origin of the Bible, Bruce, et al., p. 56). It is worth noting that none of the biblical writers or early Church scholars accepted as inspired the apocryphal books written in the inter-testamental period. Exact Copies Prepared! But how reliable are the Old Testament books that we have today? Has the text of the Old Testament been transmitted to us accurately? Consider the evidence. "In Judaism, a succession of scholars was charged with standardizing and preserving the biblical text" during a period extending from about 500bc to about 1000ad (McDowell, pp. 73–77). The earliest scribes, the Sopherim (400bc to 200ad), worked with Ezra and "were regarded as the Bible custodians until the time of Christ" (ibid.). They were followed by the Talmudists (100ad to 500ad) and finally by the Masoretes (500ad to 1000ad). Numerous accounts confirm that these scribes copied the biblical texts with extreme care, counting the number of words in a book, counting the number of times a letter appeared in a book, and even pointing out the middle letter in the Pentateuch and the middle letter in the Bible! Because of such careful attention to detail in the preparation and transmission of Old Testament manuscripts, modern scholars acknowledge that "the Hebrew Bible has been transmitted with the most minute accuracy… it may safely be said that no other work of antiquity has been so accurately transmitted… [it is] little short of miraculous" (Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, pp. 55–56). The discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls in 1947 proved just how accurately the Jews have preserved and transmitted the Old Testament text. Before the discovery of the scrolls in a cave near the Dead Sea, the oldest copy of the Hebrew text dated from around 1000ad. The newly discovered scrolls dated to the first century bc—about 1,000 years earlier! The scrolls contained two nearly complete copies of the book of Isaiah, which proved "to be word for word identical with our standard Hebrew Bible in more than 95 percent of the text. The 5 percent of the variations consisted of obvious slips of the pen and variations in spelling" (When Skeptics Ask, Geisler & Brooks, pp. 158–159). The Dead Sea Scrolls provide solid evidence that the text of the Old Testament has not changed in more than 2,000 years! The New Testament Preserved The reliability of the New Testament rests on a wealth of material that is available. Scholars readily acknowledge, "There are earlier and more manuscripts of the New Testament than of any other book in the ancient world" (Baker Encyclopedia of Christian Apologetics, Geisler, p. 93). These manuscripts clearly reveal that the New Testament "has been transmitted to us with no, or next to no, variation" (Evidence That Demands a Verdict, McDowell, p. 44). More than 24,000 manuscript copies of the New Testament in Greek, Latin and other languages provide evidence about the text. The earliest New Testament manuscripts date within a few decades or a few centuries of the apostolic writers. By comparison, there are only 643 manuscripts of Homer's Iliad (written in the 8th century bc), and the earliest copy in existence today dates from about 400bc—some 500 years after it was composed. Only 10–20 copies of writings of Julius Caesar, the Roman historian Tacitus, and the Greek historian Herodotus exist today, with the oldest manuscripts copied 1,000 years after the originals were composed (McDowell, pp. 39–43). Compared against the New Testament, no other document from the ancient world has left such a wealth of material documenting the reliable transmission of its text. In addition to the many available manuscripts, early Christian writers quoted the New Testament so extensively that almost the entire New Testament could be reconstructed from other sources. Critics have theorized that unknown authors composed the gospels centuries after the apostles. Yet the earliest fragment of John's gospel is dated 130ad, about 30 years after the apostle's death. This supports the traditional view that John wrote his gospel towards the end of the first century (see McDowell, pp. 39–47). Also, "there is no evidence from the first two Christian centuries that the gospels ever circulated without the names of the authors attached" (Sheler, p. 33). One scholar has observed: "If we compare the present state of the New Testament text with that of any other ancient writing, we must... declare it marvelously correct" (McDowell, p. 45). Another prominent scholar stated: "It cannot be too strongly asserted that in substance the text of the Bible is certain: Especially is this the case with the New Testament… This can be said of no other ancient book in the world" (ibid.). New Testament Canon For decades, critics have charged that the books of the New Testament were not written until a century or more after Jesus and the apostles lived, and were probably pieced together by anonymous authors. Such a late composition would allow time for myths and legends to creep into the text. Some progressive theologians and modern authors, as in The DaVinci Code, also assert that the books of the New Testament were selected by politically motivated committees, and that valuable books were deliberately omitted, thereby compromising the Bible's accuracy and value. However, the internal evidence of the New Testament books, the facts of history and the weight of modern scholarship all refute these ideas! Today, most credible scholars concur that "the New Testament canon with the Gospels and most of Paul's Epistles was formed by the end of the first century… The attested date for the canonical Gospels is no later than 60–100" ad (Geisler, p. 520). Neither Luke's gospel nor the book of Acts (also written by Luke) mention the 70ad destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, which was for Jews the most significant event of the century. Indeed, no New Testament author mentions the destruction of the Temple, which strongly suggests early authorship of the New Testament canon. The New Testament books themselves reveal that the authors recognized which writings God had inspired, and belonged in the canon. The Apostle Paul wrote that "the things which I write to you are the commandments of the Lord" (1 Corinthians 14:37). Paul wrote that the teachings of the apostles were divinely inspired and were to be read in the churches, "because when you received the word of God which you heard from us, you welcomed it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God" (1 Thessalonians 2:13; 5:27). Peter warned that those who were twisting Paul's writings were twisting "the Scriptures" (2 Peter 3:15–16). Scholars in the early centuries of the Church accepted the apostles' writings as Scripture, but they "all draw a clear distinction between their own [writings] and the inspired, authoritative apostolic writings" (Bruce, p. 71). This argues strongly that the New Testament canon was recognized very early in Church history. Tertullian, a religious historian who wrote in the early 200s, appears to be the first writer to call Christian Scripture the "New Testament." This is significant, because it "placed the New Testament Scripture on a level of inspiration and authority with the Old Testament" (Bruce, p. 66). From the 300s we have records showing that the New Testament canon consisted of 27 books—the same books we have today. A letter written in 367ad by Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, provides the earliest documentation of the exact 27 books of the New Testament canon. His letter, which was "designed to eliminate once and for all the use of certain apocryphal books," warns: "Let no one add to these; let nothing be taken away" (Bruce, p. 74). Later, in 397ad, a church council in Carthage decreed that "aside from the canonical Scriptures [which the council listed as 27 books] nothing is to be read in church under the Name of Divine Scriptures" (Bruce, p. 74). The clear purpose was to identify which books were part of the inspired New Testament canon, and to eliminate the use of apocryphal literature. What About Apocryphal Books? Just what are the apocryphal books? Why were they an issue of controversy in the early Church? Are they relevant today? The "Apocrypha" (which means hidden or concealed) refers to books that neither the Jews nor the early Church ever accepted as inspired or as part of the canon (see Bruce, pp. 79–94; Geisler, pp. 28–34). Most apocryphal books date to the inter-testamental period, and were written by anonymous authors or under the name of a person or a place named in Scripture. These books do not claim to be inspired. They contain no predictive prophecies, but instead contain historical and geographical errors and promote fanciful ideas and false doctrines that contradict canonical Scripture. Jesus and the New Testament writers never acknowledged the Apocrypha as Scripture. "No canonic list or church council accepted the Apocrypha for nearly the first four centuries" (Geisler, p. 33). Although some apocryphal books were published along with canonical books in the Septuagint (a Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures produced by 70 scholars in Alexandria ca. 250bc), this translation was not supervised by scribes of the Judaic tradition, who had their centers in Tiberias and Babylon. Josephus, writing in the first century ad, specifically excluded apocryphal books from the Hebrew canon when he wrote, "we have… but only twenty-two books, which are justly believed to be divine" (Against Apion, 1:8). Philo, a first century Jewish teacher in Alexandria, "quoted the Old Testament prolifically from virtually every canonical book. However, he never once quoted from the Apocrypha as inspired" (Geisler, p. 32). Prominent early writers such as Origen, Cyril of Jerusalem, Athanasius of Alexandria and Jerome all rejected the apocryphal books as inauthentic. In fact, it was Jerome (who prepared the Latin Vulgate Bible ca. 400ad) who first used the term Apocrypha when referring to books that were not considered part of the inspired biblical canon and should not be used to establish doctrine. Jerome disputed with the theologian Augustine, who felt that the apocryphal books were inspired and should be included in the canon, apparently because they had been included in the Septuagint. The Apocryphal books became a major issue during the Reformation, when Protestants (following Jerome's thinking) rejected the Apocrypha as uninspired. However, at the Council of Trent in 1546, Roman Catholic leaders (following Augustine's ideas) declared those books part of the New Testament canon. This was an attempt by the Roman church to counter the influence of Martin Luther and other reformers who were teaching against celibacy, prayers for the dead, and purgatory—ideas that do not come from canonical Scripture but are found in some apocryphal books. Yet this was not the end of the controversy over apocryphal writings. Gnostic "Gospels"? In 1945, a group of books commonly called "Gnostic gospels" were found near Nag Hammadi, an Egyptian town north of Luxor, on the Nile. Gnosticism encompassed a collection of heretical ideas that early Church leaders attributed to Simon the Sorcerer (see Acts 8:9–25; Geisler, p. 274). Gnostic writings contain purported "secret sayings" of Christ that differ dramatically from His New Testament teachings. In the Gospel of Thomas, Jesus flies into a fit of rage and causes a child who has offended Him to wither (3:1–3). In another work, Jesus makes clay birds on the Sabbath; when His parents correct Him, He claps His hands and the birds fly away. The Gospel of Philip suggests that Christ had a romantic relationship with Mary Magdalene. The Gospel of Mary asserts that Mary was the real leader of Christ's disciples. Early Church leaders denounced the Gnostic writings as spurious and heretical. Yet modern biblical critics, along with revisionist theologians, creative writers and mystical New Agers, have resurrected these "alternative" gospels and present them as equally credible as canonical Scripture. Dan Brown, author of the widely read fictional novel The DaVinci Code, draws heavily on the heretical ideas of Gnostic writings, as well as on occult, pagan goddess worship and mysticism. In his novel, he "makes the case that Mary Magdalene was… a strong independent figure, patron of Jesus, cofounder of his movement, his only believer in his greatest hour of need, author of her own Gospel, his romantic partner, and the mother of his child. To the millions of women who feel slighted, discriminated against, or unwelcome in churches of all faiths today, the novel is a chance to see early religious history in an entirely different light… The DaVinci Code opens everyone's eyes to a startlingly different view of the powerful role of women in the birth of Christianity. These themes have become mainstream at Harvard's divinity school and other intellectual centers" (Secrets of the Code, Bernstein, p. xxvii). When Dan Brown makes his leading characters say, "almost everything our fathers taught us about Christ is false" and, "The Bible is a product of man, my dear, not God," he is promoting an agenda and world view that seeks to undermine and discredit the Bible, and the Jesus Christ of the Bible. Though the plot of The DaVinci Code appears to "advocate a courageous search for truth at any price, its real goal is to undermine one of the fundamental characteristics of the Christian faith—the belief that the original message of the Gospel, enshrined in the Bible, is the unique, inspired word of God" (Cracking the Code, Garlow & Jones, p. 72). The real danger of books like The DaVinci Code comes from doubts planted in the minds of people who lack historical and biblical knowledge. For such people, the fiction of apocryphal writings can appear to be fact, which leads to deception about the true nature of inspired Scripture. One of the primary reasons for public declarations about what books comprised the canons of the Old and New Testaments was to clearly distinguish between inspired books and the false and misleading writings of the Gnostics. Chapter 5 Real Answers to Life's Big Questions Today, many people live in a materialistic world of affluence and abundance. More people enjoy a higher standard of living today than at any other time in human history. Yet with more money in our pockets and more time on our hands, millions of people still find life empty and meaningless. More and more people today are finding that money, material things and searching for the ultimate experience simply do not provide lasting happiness, remove the emptiness or provide meaningful answers to the big questions of life: Why was I born? Why am I here? Why do I exist? What is the real purpose of life? What happens when I die? Those who take time to look beyond themselves soon notice the tremendous inequities in our modern world, and wonder: Why do millions of human beings suffer from a lack of food, lack of fresh water, lack of sanitation and inadequate shelter? Why are so many people exploited and abused by corrupt leaders in failing countries? Why are wars and deliberate acts of horrific violence and terrorism proliferating around the world? Why is there no peace? Millions want a better world, but know they cannot make it happen. Why, then, does God fail to intervene—if indeed there is a God? Few people find satisfaction in the vague answers they hear from most religious leaders and secular philosophers. To hear that human beings are merely "trousered apes"—nothing more than bags of DNA struggling to survive in a purposeless universe, awaiting eternal nothingness at death—does not provide an inspiring reason to live. On the other hand, it seems like purposeless fantasy to believe that the goal of life is to spend eternity sitting on a cloud, playing a harp. To hear that "God is love"—and then to witness all the evil and inequality in the world—simply does not add up. Tragically, many today have been led to believe that these answers are "as good as it gets." But this is nonsense! Most people who assume that these are the best answers to life's big questions have never heard the real answers that God recorded in the Bible! Many theologians either do not know or do not believe what the Bible actually says about life's big questions. Because of our society's prejudice against the supernatural, fostered by biblical scholars who do not believe in the personal and all-powerful God of the Bible, millions have been conditioned to be skeptical of whatever Scripture might reveal about these subjects. However, the Bible provides real answers to life's big questions! The Purpose of Life Contrary to popular modern notions that life emerged from hot slimy pools of pre-biotic soup (akin to an idea espoused by pagan Greek philosophers) and that human beings evolved from an ape-like ancestor (as postulated by the disciples of Charles Darwin), the Bible reveals that God created human beings in His own image (Genesis 1:26–28). Whether or not you can believe this statement will depend on whether you can accept the plentiful evidence that the Bible is truly the word of God. According to Scripture, human beings were not created to amuse the gods, as some ancient philosophers assumed. The Bible reveals that God created humans so that they could learn to manage the earth (Genesis 1:26–28; 2:15), and build character by learning to discern right from wrong (Genesis 2:16–17). According to Scripture, God established the institutions of marriage and family (Genesis 2:18–24). He also established roles in marriage and revealed important guidelines so that these divinely ordained institutions would function smoothly and successfully (Matthew 19:3–9; Ephesians 5:22–33; 6:1–4; 1 Timothy 2:8–15; 1 Peter 3:1–7). The reason for the biblical emphasis on learning to manage our own lives, and on functioning smoothly in marriage and family, is that we have been created to become members of God's spiritual family (see Romans 8:15–17; Hebrews 2:5–11; 1 John 3:1–3). If we qualify to become members of that spiritual family, we will reign with Jesus Christ when He returns to establish the kingdom of God on earth (see Revelation 1:4–6; 5:10). The Bible, when properly understood, clearly reveals that we do not fly off to heaven when we die (see John 3:13; Acts 2:29, 34; 13:36). When you understand what Scripture actually reveals about the purpose of life, you can begin to understand why the teachings of today's "mainstream" Christianity are not very satisfying or convincing. To learn more about the real purpose of life as it is revealed in Scripture, request our free booklet, Your Ultimate Destiny. The Plan of God But what is the cause of the human suffering that has occurred down through time? Why is there so much evil in the world? Why does God allow it? If there is a God, why does He fail to act? People ask these questions because they do not understand that God is working out a plan and a purpose on this earth. Scripture reveals His plan, and it is pictured in the Holy Days that He commanded His people to observe (Leviticus 23). God's plan reveals not only the cause of, but also the solution to, the problems we see in our world. Many today do not believe in God's existence, but even fewer believe that Satan is real. However, Scripture reveals quite a bit about this spirit being. The Bible reveals that Satan was originally an "anointed cherub" covering the throne of God, who sinned, "became filled with violence" and led a rebellion against God involving one-third of the angels (see Ezekiel 28:1–19; Isaiah 14:12–17; Jude 6; Revelation 12:4). We see so much evil in the world today because Satan is the "god of this age… who deceives the whole world" by influencing people to reject the instructions and way of life that God has revealed in the Bible (2 Corinthians 4:3–4: Ephesians 2:1–2). You need to read these scriptures for yourself to verify what the Bible actually says about this individual who has deceived the whole world (Revelation 12:9). The biblical Holy Days picture the major steps in God's plan of salvation. Those steps reveal that Jesus Christ came to die for the sins of mankind, to replace Satan as the god of this world. Jesus then raised up His Church (Acts 2)—called the "Church of God" (1 Corinthians 1:2; 10:32; 15:9; 2 Corinthians 1:1)—to preach the gospel of God's kingdom to the world (Mark 16:15) and to prepare a group of believers to become the "firstfruits" (James 1:18; Romans 8:23; Revelation 14:1–5) who will reign with Him in the coming kingdom of God for a thousand years—a period called the Millennium (Revelation 20:4–6). The Bible also reveals that when Christ returns, Satan will be bound and put out of commission (Revelation 20:1–2). This is how God will eliminate evil, and will use the individuals whom He has prepared to solve the world's problems. This will all happen according to God's plan, which is revealed in Scripture. To learn more about God's great plan for humanity, request our free booklet The Holy Days: God's Master Plan. To learn more about the Church that began with Jesus Christ—and the remarkable and perilous course it has traveled through the centuries—request our booklet, God's Church Through the Ages. The Age to Come But what is the real hope for the future? Why should we struggle against the trials and temptations of this world? What is the value of learning to live by God's laws and the Bible's instructions? The answers emerge when we understand what the Bible reveals about the kingdom of God, and why it is called the "gospel." The word "gospel" means "good news" and the biblical message about the kingdom of God is good news—it is exciting news! The gospel of the kingdom of God, as described in the Bible, is not about some warm fuzzy feeling in your heart. It is about a coming world government that Jesus Christ will establish on this earth. The Bible clearly reveals that Jesus will return to Jerusalem (Zechariah 14:4). He will take charge of the kingdoms of this world (Revelation 11:15–18) and set up a world government that will bring true justice and lasting peace to this planet. Jesus will be aided by the saints, individuals who understand the laws of God and have learned to function within the family of God, who will serve as civil and religious leaders—"kings and priests" (Revelation 5:10). God's government will bring peace and justice to the earth (Isaiah 9:6–7). The saints will also function as teachers (Isaiah 30:20–21) who will explain the laws of God (Isaiah 2:2–4), show people the way to peace (Psalm 119:165) and help them understand the real causes of strife and war (James 4:1–4). Christians are urged to "grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord" (2 Peter 3:18) so that they will be prepared to rule with Christ in this coming kingdom. The Bible reveals that in the coming kingdom of God, rebuilt cities will promote a sense of community and will be in harmony with the environment (Isaiah 61:4; 11:6–9; Amos 9:14–15). Our polluted planet will be restored and made productive (Isaiah 35:1–7; Amos 9:13). The global curse of disease will be eliminated as people learn to live by the Bible's personal and public health laws (see Leviticus 3:17; 7:23–27; 11:1–47). The peoples of the world will learn to speak one language (Zephaniah 3:9), and "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea" (Isaiah 11:9). The Bible speaks of the coming kingdom of God as the "times of refreshing" in which there will be a "restoration of all things" (Acts 3:19–20). The Apostle Paul called this "the world to come" or "the age to come" (Hebrews 2:5). We also call it Tomorrow's World. The Bible holds out these scriptural teachings as our real hope for the future! Modern critics scoff at taking Scripture literally, at face value. Many preachers do not even mention the exciting biblical information we have covered in this booklet. Instead, most willingly overlook or even ignore what history reveals about the teachings and beliefs of the early Church. Historian Edward Gibbon wrote: "The ancient and popular doctrine of the Millennium was intimately connected with the second coming of Christ… a joyful Sabbath of a thousand years; and that Christ, with the triumphant band of the saints and the elect… would reign upon earth… The assurance of such a Millennium was carefully inculcated by a succession of fathers from Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, who conversed with the immediate disciples… Though it might not be universally received, it appears to have been the reigning sentiment of the orthodox believers; and it seems so well adapted to the desires and apprehensions of mankind, that it must have contributed in a very considerable degree to the progress of the Christian faith" (The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Gibbon, vol. 1, pp. 187–188). Gibbon wrote plainly that early Christians believed and taught about the Millennium—the coming kingdom of God. The Bible's exciting and inspiring gospel of God's kingdom motivated believers and spurred the growth of the early Church. However, Gibbon also recorded how early theologians, influenced by pagan philosophy—believing they knew better than God's inspired word—gradually watered down this important teaching of Scripture and then explained it away, first calling it allegory, then calling it heresy. Millions have lost sight of—or have never heard—the real biblical answers to life's big questions, because most scholars and religious leaders have rejected—or never heard—those answers! This is one reason why so many today find life empty and meaningless. Conclusion: Truth and Consequences In our modern age, many seriously doubt or openly disbelieve that an all-powerful supernatural God inspired Scripture. Many assume that the Bible is no different than any other humanly authored book. Many also assume that modern scholarship has completely discredited the Bible, and that no evidence exists that proves otherwise. Yet, as we have seen in this booklet, the truth is just the opposite! These widely held beliefs and assumptions are, in reality, fictions that are totally contrary to the facts! The big question that you face, and the challenge that confronts many others today, is: What exactly will you believe about the Bible? Will you believe the facts discussed in this booklet (which only scratches the surface of this vast subject), or will you accept skeptics' speculations that undermine and discredit the Bible—largely by ignoring the facts? The God of the Bible can challenge us to "examine all things" and "prove" whether He exists (and whether He inspired the Bible), because there is so much remarkable and irrefutable evidence available! True biblical scholars know that the Bible is unlike any other religious book in the world, and that the most distinctive feature of the Bible is prophecy. Students of prophecy know that the Bible contains hundreds of specific prophecies that have been consistently and accurately fulfilled. No other book on the face of the earth contains such remarkable prophetic material, and human efforts to predict the future simply do not compare to the scope and accuracy of Bible prophecy. All this provides powerful evidence pointing to the Bible's divine origin. The facts of history demonstrate that the Bible has been preserved and accurately transmitted for thousands of years, in spite of concerted efforts to outlaw, suppress, corrupt, burn and destroy it. The continued existence of the Bible under such adverse and hostile conditions offers strong support that an all-powerful God inspired such biblical statements as "the word of the Lord endures forever" and "My counsel shall stand." The remarkable way that archaeological discoveries continue to confirm Scripture's historical accuracy, and undermine critics' speculative theories, clearly affirms that the Bible is the inspired word of God! The Bible provides real answers to life's big questions, unlike academics, philosophers and theologians who offer mere platitudes. This strongly indicates that the Bible's answers were revealed from a supernatural source. But why do critics and skeptics—who are often highly educated—ignore the facts and continue to claim that the Bible is only a collection of myths and legends, and is untrustworthy as a source of historical, theological or scientific information? Is it significant that secular-minded scholars have planted doubts about the Bible in the minds of millions of people today? What are the consequences of ignoring evidence that the Bible is the inspired word of God? Scripture provides informative answers and offers sobering warnings. The Bible reveals the cause of this widespread deception: Satan "deceives the whole world" (Revelation 12:9). We can certainly see this when we consider the incredible misconceptions that so many have acquired about the Bible. Jesus prophesied that one sign of the "end of the age" would be the increasing number of false teachers who "will deceive many" by spreading false teachings (Matthew 24:3–5, 11). The Apostle Peter warned that false teachers would subtly bring in "destructive heresies" that would discredit the truth of God and deceive many people (2 Peter 2:1–3). He also warned that "scoffers will come in the last days, walking according to their own lusts"—casting doubts on Scripture and ignoring the facts of history (see 2 Peter 3:3–9). This deception will be widespread at the end of the age. However, the Apostle Paul reveals that scoffers and false teachers will reap serious consequences from the God they are mocking and defying. He wrote: "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all… who suppress the truth in unrighteousness, because what may be known of God is manifest in them… so that they are without excuse, because, although they knew God, they did not glorify Him as God… but became futile in their thoughts, and their foolish hearts were darkened. Professing to be wise, they became fools" (Romans 1:18–22). Paul's condemnation of the misguided pagan intellectuals of his day also applies to the misguided scholars and critics of today—who ignore the powerful evidence that points to God as the author and sustainer of the Bible. We need to remember that there is a judgment coming! The stinging reproofs that the prophet Jeremiah leveled at his contemporaries also apply in our present day. Jeremiah warned that "the prophets become wind, for the word [of God] is not in them… The prophets prophesy falsely… and My people love to have it so… the false pen of the scribe certainly works falsehood… the prophets prophesy lies in My name. I have not sent them… they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart, who try to make My people forget My name by their dreams… and cause My people to err by their lies and by their recklessness… they shall not profit this people at all" (Jeremiah 5:13, 31; 8:8; 14:14; 23:26, 30–32). God said through Jeremiah that because His people "have forsaken My law… and have not obeyed My voice… but they have walked according to the dictates of their own hearts… I will scatter them also among the Gentiles… I will send a sword after them until I have consumed them" (Jeremiah 9:13–16). The Bible clearly reveals that serious consequences will befall those who forsake the laws of God and promote their own theories, or follow those who do. However, wonderful benefits come to those who prove and believe that the Bible is God's inspired word, and who follow God's biblical instructions. King David wrote: "Blessed are [they]… Who walk in the law of the Lord… Your commandments make me wiser than my enemies… Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path… Great peace have those who love Your law, and nothing causes them to stumble… All Your commandments are truth… The entirety of Your word is truth" (Psalm 119:98, 105, 151, 160, 165). The Bible reveals that God will look favorably on those who develop a deep respect for His word, and are willing to follow its instructions. The prophet Isaiah wrote, "But on this one will I look: On him who is poor and of a contrite spirit, and who trembles at My word" (Isaiah 66:2). The Bible reveals that God has not left human beings to flounder without fundamental guidelines, or without important answers to life's big questions. God has inspired and preserved the Bible in a way that no other book has ever been preserved. He has filled Scripture with hundreds of prophecies that accurately predict the future—setting the Bible apart from all other religious books on earth. The discoveries of archaeology and the facts of history continue to confirm the validity of Scripture, even though it was written thousands of years ago. These facts are simply astounding and cannot reasonably be denied! When you weigh critics' claims about the Bible against the tremendous evidence of the Bible's divine inspiration, you are left with a clear choice. You can choose to believe that critics' theories might have some foundation in fact, while waiting for the next theory to change and assumptions to be revised. Or you can trust the evidence from archaeology, history and fulfilled prophecy, which clearly reveals that the Bible is the inspired word of God—fact, not fiction! Share Your Thoughts With Us! Because of volume we may not be able to promptly reply to submissions using the form below. If you require more immediate assistance please visit our “Contact Us” page. Name * Last Name * Email * Message * Read Magazine List Articles Subscribe Booklets Order Commentary Subscribe Pamphlets Woman to Woman Bible Study Course Register News and Prophecy Subscribe Acts of God: Why Natural Disasters? Gerald Weston Why do natural disasters ravage our world? Are hurricanes, earthquakes, and other disasters simply the natural order of things? Is mankind responsible for them, or does the label “acts of God” carry far more meaning than many realize? And what does... Read More... Armageddon and Beyond Richard F. Ames Mankind is developing newer and more frightening technologies with which to destroy itself, while political and social tensions increase around the world. Will the years just ahead of us bring worldwide nuclear devastation, or usher in an era of... Read More... Christian Baptism: Its Real Meaning Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) What do you see when you look at yourself? How badly do you personally need God’s forgiveness? Do you really stand in need of a Savior? Perhaps you have already been baptized as a child, or even as an infant. You might not even remember the event.... Read More... Do You Believe the True Gospel? Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) What did Jesus really preach? Do you know? Do not be too sure! Just what did Jesus mean by "the Kingdom of God"? Here is the exciting Good News: there is a new world coming! Read More... Does God Heal Today? Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) The Bible shows us that a day is coming when massive disease epidemics will ravage our world. Doctors and hospitals will be overwhelmed with the sick and dying. Those who have not learned to trust God will have nowhere to turn. But if you learn... Read More... Easter: The Untold Story Gerald Weston Every year, billions of people observe a joyous Easter Sunday celebration. For some, it may be one of the few times each year they come to church. For others, it may be the culmination of observances going back to Ash Wednesday, Palm Sunday and Good... Read More... Evolution and Creation: What Both Sides Miss Wallace G. Smith The theory of evolution is often described as an undeniable fact, proven by science. Does the evidence demand such a conclusion? Young-earth creationists claim that Earth and the universe were created 6,000 years ago. Does the Bible really teach... Read More... Fourteen Signs Announcing Christ's Return Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Do you know what lies ahead in your future? What about the future of your nation and the world? We are not living in ordinary times. We are nearing the end of an age—the end of a civilization. Read More... God's Church Through the Ages John H. Ogwyn (1949–2005) God's Church has endured through the ages. It is a "little flock" (Luke 12:32), but God has always remained true to His promise that "the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it" (Matthew 16:18). In this revealing booklet, you will find a brief... Read More... God's People Tithe! Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Did you know that the Creator has a financial law that is applicable to true Christians today, and that Almighty God will bless those who are willing to obey this law in faith? Read More... God's Plan for Happy Marriage Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) There really are "keys" and time-tested principles that can help produce truly happy marriages! Our success in marriage depends upon our willingness to use these keys in our own lives. Read More... Is Christmas Christian? Living Church of God We see the scene every year… decorated trees, evergreen wreaths and bright multi-colored lights. Sometimes there is a little crèche in the corner, depicting an infant child receiving lavish gifts. Yet most of the gift-giving these days is done by... Read More... Is This the ONLY Day of Salvation? Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) What will happen to the billions of human beings who have never known the true God - who have never accepted any form of Christianity? Are they forever doomed to a burning Hell or an eternity in outer darkness? What is the real answer to these... Read More... John 3:16 Gerald Weston How does God's love for the world, and for you individually, affect His Eternal promise for you and all mankind? You can understand John 3:16 in a much more profound way than you might ever have! Read More... Marijuana: What They Aren't Telling You Stuart Wachowicz Efforts to legalize the use of marijuana, for both “medicinal” and recreational purposes, continue to grow and find success in the halls of state and national governments. Is the drug as harmless as advocates claim? Could society benefit from... Read More... Prophecy Fulfilled: God's Hand in World Affairs Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Humanity today is facing staggering crises of war, disease, pollution, drought and famine. Where will it all lead? Bible prophecy reveals that God is working through current events to bring about a future time when the whole world will be at peace.... Read More... Restoring Original Christianity Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) If Jesus of Nazareth were to return to the earth today, would He recognize the religion that is using His name? Not at all! Mankind has twisted Jesus Christ's teachings so that the religion bearing His name has practically no relationship to what He... Read More... Revelation: The Mystery Unveiled! John H. Ogwyn (1949–2005) Many consider Revelation the most difficult-to-understand book in the Bible. Some dismiss its complicated narrative and vivid descriptions as mere allegory. Others assume that it recounts past history. The truth, however, is far more remarkable: if... Read More... Satan's Counterfeit Christianity Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) The astounding message in this booklet will affect you in the years just ahead, and it will also affect your eternal future! It is vitally important. This information has been suppressed for many centuries, but it is information that you need to... Read More... Successful Parenting: God's Way Jeffrey Fall What is the real purpose of parenting? Is it merely to bring up children to become independent and competent adults, or is there something more? Read on, for the amazing answer! Read More... The Beast of Revelation: Myth, Metaphor or Soon-Coming Reality? John H. Ogwyn (1949–2005) How will global religio-political developments affect you and your family? Will a world dictator soon appear? Just who or what is the Beast, and will you receive its infamous mark? Read on for the startling answers! Read More... The Bible: Fact or Fiction? Douglas S. Winnail Is the Bible just a collection of myths and legends, or is it the inspired word of God? Many assume that modern scholarship has discredited the Bible, but the facts of history — and the discoveries of archaeology — confirm its contents to be true!... Read More... The Holy Days: God's Master Plan Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Why do most professing Christians observe Christmas, Easter and Halloween, yet fail to observe the very days that the Bible clearly commands? Does it make that much difference which days we keep? Does it affect our hope for eternal life? And does it... Read More... The Middle East in Prophecy Richard F. Ames Jerusalem is the most important city in the world. Scripture shows that the region surrounding it—the Middle East—will eventually explode into world war. Do you know what the Bible teaches about the end-time climax of world events in the region?... Read More... The Real God: Proofs and Promises Douglas S. Winnail Why is the God of the universe not real to most people today? Why is there so much skepticism and doubt about God? If you have ever pondered these questions, the answers could change your life! In this booklet we will examine the sources of modern... Read More... The Ten Commandments Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Today's "modern" society is in conflict over the Ten Commandments. Have they been "done away" by divine fiat or by mankind's march toward scientific knowledge? Should they be displayed in public places, or reserved for the church? Are they a burden... Read More... The United States and Great Britain in Prophecy John H. Ogwyn (1949–2005) Prove it straight from your Bible's own pages What's really on the horizon for the world's English-speaking peoples Is it possible that end-time prophecies ignore the U.S., Great Britain and other British-descended people? Does Britain's exit... Read More... The World Ahead: What Will It Be Like? Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) God's government is coming to this earth soon! How will it affect you? What is the real future for which you should be preparing? Read More... Twelve Keys to Answered Prayer Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Have you ever wondered, "Why doesn't God answer my prayers?" Do you know how to pray in a way that will get real results? Read More... What Is a True Christian? Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) More than 400 sects and denominations call themselves "Christian"—but they all have some basic, and often fundamental, differences. Would Jesus Christ recognize the organizations using His name today? How can you be sure what a true Christian should... Read More... Where Is God's True Church Today? Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Thousands of different denominations claim to be following Jesus Christ. Yet they teach thousands of different "gospels" and disagree on countless points of doctrine. Is Jesus Christ the Head of all these denominations? Is Christ divided? Or is... Read More... Which Day Is The Christian Sabbath? Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Here is an absolutely VITAL subject that is far more important than most people even begin to realize! It has everything to do with whether or not you really "know" the true God—the Creator. In fact, it directly affects your inheriting everlasting... Read More... Who or What Is the Antichrist? Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Can you prove, from the Bible, who or what the prophesied Antichrist really is? This is not some esoteric topic. Your correct understanding may affect whether or not you will be able to fulfill the role that God has planned for you in His kingdom! Read More... Your Ultimate Destiny Roderick C. Meredith (1930-2017) Why were you born? Why does God allow even dedicated Christians to go through years and decades of trials, tests and persecutions? Why is it so important that we all "overcome"? What is the magnificent purpose for all our lives here on planet Earth? Read More... Home TELECAST TV/RADIO LOG ABOUT CONTACT US DONATIONS HOLY DAY CALENDAR ORDER & SUBSCRIBE TW PRESENTATIONS OUR APPS TWNow Webcasts PODCASTS SOCIAL SITES PUBLICATIONS EMAIL SUBSCRIPTIONS BOOKLETS COMMENTARY MAGAZINE NEWS AND PROPHECY PAMPHLETS WOMAN TO WOMAN BIBLE STUDY COURSE INTERNATIONAL Le Monde de Demain El Mundo de Mañana Die Welt von Morgen Wereld van Morgen Wereld van More O Mundo de Amanhã عالم الغد 明日世界 עולם המחר कल विश्ि Мир завтра Dunia wa Kesho Tomorrow's World Facebook icon Twitter icon YouTube icon Instagram icon mobile apps icon © 2019 Tomorrow's World - Privacy Policy Sponsored By: Living Church of God We use cookies to improve your experience of our website. For more information on how this website uses cookies and instructions on how to disable them, please click here to view our Cookie Policy. By continuing to use this website, you are consenting to the website's use of cookies. Got It! Home Español Français Facebook iconTwitter iconYouTube icon CONNECT ABOUT COMMENTS ORDER FREE DONATIONS READ BIBLE STUDY COURSE BOOKLETS COMMENTARY MAGAZINE WATCH TELECAST TV LOG TWNOW VIEWPOINT Home Read Booklets The Bible: Fact or Fiction? The Bible: Fact or Fiction? Douglas S. Winnail Comment on this Booklet Audio Player
$$$

Bible Education

    Home
    Bible Education
    Online Bible Courses
    About
    Contact
    Blog
    Articles

The Christian and Politics
Picture
The question is …
The question is: ‘Should a Christian take any part in politics?’ Should he or she:

    Vote in a general or local election?
    Join a political party?
    Become an elected representative?
    Join in political demonstrations or pressure groups?

What is really expected of a Christian?  What is the right thing to do?

Christadelphians believe that the Bible teaches us that we should avoid allinvolvement in politics and that the answer to each of the questions above is ‘No’. But those who are not familiar with this point of view may well be puzzled by it. After all, isn’t the right to vote an important part of life in any democratic society? Isn’t democracy the best political system for a country, the way to ensure moderate policies and stability? Doesn’t this require all of us to participate by playing our part in the political life of our country?

Millions of respectable citizens vote; there are many sincere Christians who are active in politics; and it could be argued that it’s actually part of a Christian’s dutyto see that their country is run properly. Surely Christians should exercise their right to vote, should try to get the right people into power and so help to improve society?

It has even been suggested that it is un-Christian not to vote. What would happen, for example, if everybody abstained at election times? Wouldn’t it result in complete chaos for us all? How could such a selfish attitude possibly be compatible with a Christian outlook?

‘Society’s point of view’
Our society expects its citizens to take part in the political process. It is also true that there are many politicians who enter politics with the conviction that they can improve the lot of mankind. In the recent history of the Western world, a number of governments have had remarkable success in improving the quality of life of the average individual – the establishment of the Welfare State in the UK, and the post-war German economic miracle are obvious examples of this. There are also many leading politicians who are happy to be known as practising Christians, and who seem to have no qualms of conscience about the exercise of power in the interests of the public good. Some political parties even include the description ‘Christian’ in their party’s name.

All these points certainly look like reasons for Christians to be willing to play a responsible part in the way their country is managed, especially if it is ‘for the right motives’. So why do Christadelphians take such a different view of these important issues?

God’s point of view
Everything so far in this booklet has been looked at from a purely human standpoint. The phrases used include expressions such as “the public good”, “the quality of life”, and “improving the lot of mankind”.

Now these expressions are all very well if you are a humanist. If you don’t believe in God, and you think that man is the author of his own destiny, then it’s perfectly reasonable for you to believe that we can manage our own political affairs in a way which will bring about a better future for the world.

But what about God’s instructions? What about the teachings of Jesus Christ? Surely, if we claim to be Christians, followers of Christ, then we cannot leave them out of our considerations. Quite the opposite in fact, we must look very carefully at what they tell us.

Christadelphians believe that it is only God’s view on this subject that matters – as with every other aspect of our lives. So we must turn to the Bible to read what He has to say about our relationships with the societies in which we live. What then does the Bible have to say about the Christian and Politics? What is the positive teaching of the word of God?

Three Bible principles
The Bible has much helpful and clear teaching on this subject; in particular there are three principles which we must consider. Briefly summarised, these are:

    God rules in the kingdom of men
    God has His own political manifesto for us
    We should follow the personal example and teaching of Jesus

It is vital for Christians to understand these principles. They will help us to work out exactly how we should respond to calls to vote or become more deeply involved in the political process of the country in which we live.

First principle: “God rules …”
God’s claim is that He is King – King over all who worship Him now, and King in the past over the nation of Israel. He called the children of Israel to be “a kingdom of priests, a holy nation” (Exodus 19:6). Other nations and their leaders, particularly those surrounding Israel, were influenced by God, often without knowing the part they played in His purpose. One of these was king Nebuchadnezzar, an autocratic ruler of ancient Babylon who lived six hundred years before Christ. Like modern humanists who think that people can improve the world by their own devices, he refuted the supremacy of the God of the Bible in the control of human affairs. The Book of Daniel, in the Old Testament, gives us a picture of this great Eastern monarch full of pride at his own achievements. We read of him boasting out loud:

    “Is not this great Babylon, which I have built by my mighty power as a royal residence and for the glory of my majesty?” (Daniel 4:30)

However, Nebuchadnezzar had a hard lesson to learn; three times in this same chapter the all important principle is repeated that:

    “The Most High rules the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will.”

To reinforce this principle, Nebuchadnezzar, the great ruler, was suddenly and dramatically struck down with mental illness, was driven away to make his home with animals, and was deprived of his kingdom until he humbled himself before God.

Nebuchadnezzar rose from the most humble background to be the leader of a great empire. The world saw him as a man who succeeded through his own abilities, yet his life was ordered by God to teach us that God, and not man, is ultimately in control.
When Nebuchadnezzar had his sanity restored by God, he was honest enough to acknowledge these lessons:

    “At the end of the days I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted my eyes to heaven, and my reason returned to me, and I blessed the Most High, and praised and honoured him who lives for ever … he does according to his will in the host of heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand or say to him, What doest thou?” (Daniel 4:34,35)

“He does according to his will … and none can stay his hand.” What implications there are in these words for us as we listen to the promises and the claims of the political leaders of our times! God’s rule, as Nebuchadnezzar came to know, “is an everlasting dominion …”

The principle illustrated again
It doesn’t really matter which era of man’s history you look into: if you see it from God’s point of view, His control is always in evidence. His hand can be seen, overruling and directing the will of men – whether or not they believe in Him. Sometimes, for our benefit, the curtain is drawn fully back, as in the example of Cyrus, the great ruler of the Persian Empire in the sixth century BC.

This example of Cyrus gives us a clear insight into how God works ‘behind the scenes’ with men and nations. In Isaiah 45:1, God refers to this powerful ruler as “His anointed”, even though Cyrus himself was not consciously aware of God’s direct involvement in his life. “I call you by your name, I surname you, though you do not know me”, God said to the king (verse 4). The remarkable thing about these words is that they were given by God to the prophet Isaiah, and written down by him, about 170 years before Cyrus was born. At the time the name ‘Cyrus’ would mean nothing! Why did God tell Isaiah that He would control the actions of this man – why was He willing to smooth his path to victory after victory in his rise to power? The prophet tells us why: it was so that the political survival of God’s people, Israel, would be assured. It was done “for the sake of my servant Jacob, and Israel my chosen” (verse 4). God’s purpose with Israel would be fulfilled by Cyrus, even though he didn’t know it at the time.

The principle still applies
Now you may wonder whether all this history is relevant to the politics of the twenty-first century. Surely this first Bible principle makes it clear that this really is the case. “The Most High rules the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will”, holds true today just as it did over two thousand years ago. The true Christian, the Bible-based believer, understands that God, and not man, is still in control of human affairs. Throughout the Bible, we are shown how the tangled web of local, national, and international politics – so many aspects of which are hidden even from those directly involved – is all in God’s good hands, both in history and in the contemporary world. “His dominion”, said Nebuchadnezzar, “is an everlastingdominion”. God never changes: this Bible principle still applies today, and it applies whether we recognise it or not.

Our personal response
Our personal response to all this will depend on how much we acknowledge the Bible as the word of God and how much we are prepared to listen to its message to us.

If we refuse to accept that “all scripture is given by inspiration of God”, and that it is able to make us “wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus”, then Bible teaching about God’s control of human affairs will appear meaningless to us. If this is the case then we are justified in making our own fallible political decisions and to make up our own minds as best we may on the basis of what we see and hear in the world around us. But … we then need to live with the consequences of those decisions, especially when we get them wrong!

Christadelphians believe differently. We accept fully the authority of the Bible and believe that it tells us of the unchanging and everlasting rule of God throughout human history. To unbelievers, a position of complete non-involvement in political affairs seems to be a negative attitude to the political challenges of the world. However, true Christians are men and women who are convinced that God is in control of human affairs, and that His plan and purpose is being worked out on this earth, regardless of what any man may do to thwart it. They believe that such non-involvement is a positive and deliberate statement of allegiance to God, and a complete subjection to His will. Convinced that God is in control – not man – such people take no part at all in politics. How are we to know which of our leaders is the one God wants to be in power? How shall we be sure, if we cast our vote, that we are voting for the person who is the right one in God’s eyes? It is sufficient to know, and to be certain that God’s will shall be done “on earth, as it is in heaven”.

Second principle: God has a political manifesto
The second principle arises from the first. God is in control of our world; but He is not like some mythical Greek god who amuses himself by tampering with our fate and who makes life difficult for us for no particular reason. Far from it! Instead, the Bible shows us very clearly that our God – the God of the Old Testament and of the New – has His own political agenda. He has planned the ultimate solution for all the problems of our world; and it is for that perfect remedy that every true Christian should pray, as Jesus taught his disciples to say:

    “Our Father who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come.Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.” (Matthew 6:9,10)

The Bible tells us that God, the Creator of this earth, has had one specific purpose in mind for it from the beginning of time. The Bible tells us quite unequivocally what that purpose is. The time is coming when God’s laws will be enforced throughout the whole earth. The word of God contains this divine political manifesto for the earth’s future. It is a manifesto full of promises which God Himself will deliver, and towards which He is constantly at work in our world. Moreover, He gives us an absolute guarantee that what He has promised, He will deliver:

    “But truly, as I live … all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord.” (Numbers 14:21)


The manifesto unfolds: 1 – Nebuchadnezzar’s dream
We shall now look at four Bible passages which summarise God’s manifesto for the future of our world.

The first takes us back again to king Nebuchadnezzar. This king had a dream of a giant statue of a man, made of five different metals. In his dream, the statue was knocked over by a stone and ground into powder by it. The stone then grew into a mountain which filled the whole earth. Perhaps not surprisingly, the king could not understand his dream and he needed the prophet Daniel to tell him its meaning (Daniel 2:36-45). The interpretation he gave is an intriguing and accurate political history of the nation of Israel and the nations which invade it, given in remarkable prophetic detail that can be mapped from Babylon to the present day. The precise identification of these various empires is a fascinating and rewarding subject. However the important point for us now to notice is that (in verses 44,45) God declares His intention to set up His own kingdom, the establishment of which is foreshadowed by the work of the little stone in the dream:

    “The God of heaven (shall) set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.”


This, in a nutshell, is God’s political manifesto.
The manifesto unfolds: 2 – Daniel’s visionLater in his life, Daniel had a dream about the fulfilment of this promise. He described it like this:

    “I saw in the night visions, and behold, with the clouds of heaven there came one like a son of man, and he came to the Ancient of Days and was presented before him. And to him was given dominion and glory and kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom one that shall not be destroyed.” (Daniel 7:13,14)

Although the language used in the book of Daniel is sometimes difficult to understand, there can be no misunderstanding of this passage. Here is a picture of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of Man. He is given authority by his Father to return to the earth and to rule over it. All nations will serve him. What a picture of power and authority this is! When he comes, no-one will be able to resist him.

The manifesto unfolds: 3 – the role of Jesus
Matthew 26 contains the remarkable record of Jesus standing before the High Priest at his trial. Shortly afterwards he will be taken and crucified, but Matthew gives us a picture of him which clearly identifies him with the “stone” of Daniel 2 and the “Son of Man” of Daniel 7.

The significance of this particular occasion is underlined by the fact that Jesus is on oath, and on trial for his life, before the highest civil and spiritual authority of first century Israel. The Jewish leaders, who hated Jesus, were trying to catch him on a charge of blasphemy, and wanted him to repeat his earlier claim to be “the Christ, the Son of God” (Matthew 26:63). Jesus, who always spoke the truth, could hardly deny that this was true. “You have said so” was his reply. This is a Jewish idiom equivalent to saying: ‘You’re quite right’. Jesus did not leave it there, however, he went on to identify himself to the High Priest as the one like “the Son of Man” in Daniel 7; and he did this by quoting Daniel 7:13 and applying it to himself:

    “… But I tell you, hereafter you will see the Son of man seated at the right hand of power, and coming on the clouds of heaven.” (Matthew 26:64)

Jesus could hardly have been more explicit. He was telling the Jews that he was indeed the one promised by Daniel who would come to set up an everlasting kingdom on the earth. This is confirmed by the violent response of the High Priest who knew his Old Testament scriptures and who recognised that Jesus was applying Daniel’s prophecy to himself. He was appalled at what he considered to be these blasphemous claims by Jesus.

    “Then the high priest tore his robes, and said, ‘He has uttered blasphemy. Why do we still need witnesses?’”

No further need at all! Jesus is the Son of Man and the stone of Daniel; and he will both destroy the kingdom of men at his coming and receive the eternal kingdom of his Father!

The manifesto unfolds: 4 – but when? (Acts 3)
The fourth and final Bible passage picks up that important word used by Jesus in Matthew 26:64: “Hereafter”. We know for certain that Jesus will be God’s appointed ruler in His eternal kingdom. However it is not until the apostles commenced their preaching about Jesus (after his ascension to heaven) that we get some inkling as to when Jesus will finish God’s work and fulfil all His manifesto pledges.

Acts 3 gives us a helpful clue about when the “hereafter” might be. This is only the second time the Christian gospel was preached after the ascension of Jesus, and therefore the message is all the more significant. The preacher is the Apostle Peter, who declares:

    “Repent therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be blotted out, that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and that he may send the Christ appointed for you, Jesus, whom heaven must receive until the time for establishing all that God spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from of old.” (Acts 3:19-21)

Peter confirms the good news of the great promises made by God. His was not a new message but a continuation of those things which God had spoken of from the beginning of the world! What greater assurance could there be that God’s plan for the world was still on course? This is what true Christians should be preaching about and praying for today – the kingdom of God on earth ruled over by His Son Jesus. This is the only political manifesto with which true Christians should get involved. This is the only solution to all the world’s problems which God Himself will bring about, whatever men may say or do either to help or hinder Him. “For who has resisted his will?” (Romans 9:19).

Third principle: the example and teaching of Jesus
The personal example and teaching of Jesus Christ is of great importance to those who think about this subject. How did Jesus act and speak when faced with the political issues of his day? What were his responses and what did he expect of his disciples as they followed him? Perhaps most important of all, what does Jesus expect of us today?
​
Jesus Christ himself: rendering unto Caesar?
Thankfully we are not left in doubt about how Jesus behaved when faced with political questions. There are many occasions recorded in the Gospels when his contemporaries asked for his opinions about such matters, or wanted to embroil him (often for their own ends) in political issues. And yet, on every one of these occasions, Jesus steadfastly refused to be drawn into the arguments, or to commit himself to one party or another in the contemporary political scene. His attitude towards the state was based on conscientiously obeying the laws of the land and no more – and even then only if that did not conflict with his duty towards God.

Luke 20 contains one particularly important incident of this kind. The enemies of Jesus were keen to draw him into declaring his political allegiance. Was it right or wrong for a Jew to pay taxes to Rome? Here was the perfect opportunity for Jesus to show his solidarity with his people, downtrodden as they were by the cruel power of Rome and the rapacity of their greedy tax-gatherers. Yet the answer of Jesus rose right above the political issues, avoided the minefield of controversy, and placed the answer firmly back on the individual conscience:

    “Render … to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” (Luke 20:25)

What a wonderfully balanced response this is for every disciple of Jesus Christ! His answer holds true for every generation – not just for oppressed Jews in his day. If we truly gave to God everything we should, then we should have very little time, energy, or resource to devote to anyone or anything else. So while the reply of Jesus may seem to be just a brilliant piece of verbal diplomacy to get him out of a tricky situation, it is actually a searching challenge to every would-be Christian. Where is our true allegiance, and whose claims upon us take precedence? If we are really committed to God, then it is impossible for us to balance an interest in this world with our discipleship. God wants wholehearted believers whose political interests lie solely in the coming kingdom of God, for:

    “No one can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other.” (Matthew 6:24)


The example of Jesus again: “Art thou a king then?”
There was an occasion during his ministry when Jesus became so popular with the crowds that they wanted to take him by force and make him their king there and then (John 6:15). So how did Jesus respond to this public acclaim? Did he seize it as an opportunity to make his world a better place, by using his influence and power for the common good? Did he listen to the voice of the people? For here, surely, was a wonderful opportunity for this great leader, with such gifts of oratory and personal charisma, to use his God-given talents to help his nation in their difficulties under the yoke of Rome. How did he behave in such circumstances, and why?

It is worth remembering that the preparation that Jesus underwent in the wilderness, prior to his public ministry, included this very same challenge. One of the temptations he faced was to use his power to reign over the whole earth there and then (Matthew 4:8-10). He knew that God’s kingdom on earth would one day be his. Many Old Testament prophets had promised this (including Daniel, as we have seen). The angel Gabriel had confirmed this to his mother (Luke 1:32,33). “All power in heaven and earth” had been promised to him by God (Matthew 28:18). But this would only happen in God’s good time – it was God’s timetable for these things which was important, not that which Jesus was tempted to implement. He had the power of God’s Holy Spirit: he could do great good in the world, he could influence world politics more than any other man before or since. Yet he resisted this temptation because it was not part of God’s plan. It was not for Jesus to try to seize the initiative from God, or to force his Father’s hand.
For this reason Jesus refused to use his popularity with the crowds to try to make his Father accelerate His manifesto programme. So the record tells us that:

    “Perceiving then that they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, Jesus withdrew again to the mountain by himself.” (John 6:15)

He had the wisdom to recognise that it was not yet the time for him to intervene in world affairs.

Within a short time, however, the fickle crowds who wanted Jesus as their king had turned against him. Small wonder then that Pontius Pilate, when Jesus was brought before him on the charge of claiming to be “the King of the Jews”, should ask him point blank: “So you are a king?” (John 18:37). Pilate was used to rebels and zealots rising up against the power of Rome. However, he recognised that Jesus was different, and that the last thing he was guilty of was political resistance to the Roman power. Jesus had never agitated against Rome, and he was not guilty of the trumped-up charge. “I find no crime in him”, was Pilate’s conclusion after examining his case.

“So are you a king?” was Pilate’s somewhat puzzled question to Jesus; and the reply that Jesus gave explains his steadfast refusal to participate in the politics of his day.

    “Jesus answered, My kingship is not of this world; if my kingship were of this world, my servants would fight … but my kingship is not from the world (or, my kingdom is from another place).” (John 18:36)


In the footsteps of Jesus: the early disciples
No fighting then – the followers of Christ must not bear or use arms, unless specifically instructed by their Lord. For they must “speak evil of no one, avoid quarrelling, be gentle, and show perfect courtesy toward all men” (Titus 3:2). So no political agitation or direct action for Jesus and his immediate disciples, since their political agenda was set by God Himself, for another time, and “from another place”. For his immediate first century followers too, it was a case of following the Lord’s example in relation to the state and political affairs. For them, as for Jesus, it was a matter of passive subjection to authority, of non-participation, and of watching and praying patiently for the kingdom of God to come.

They were to learn from Israel of old. The Apostle Peter, writing to Christian believers, said: “You are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God’s own people” (1 Peter 2:9). He told them that they were “as aliens and exiles” in the different countries where they lived (verse 11). The example they were to show to unbelievers was of quiet and humble obedience: “Be subject for the Lord’s sake to every human institution … Fear God. Honour the emperor” (verses 13,17).

No doubt they remembered how, at the beginning of his ministry, Jesus spelled out to them what these things meant in practice. His discourse is found in Matthew 5-7 and we call it the Sermon on the Mount. In it Jesus gave direct answers to the questions we asked at the beginning of this booklet. We can summarise them in the table below.

Vote in a general or local election or join a political party?
“Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.” (6:21)

Become an elected representative?
“No one can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and mammon.” (6:24)

Join in political demonstrations or pressure groups to make a better world?
“Therefore do not be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Let the day’s own trouble be sufficient for the day.” (6:34)

All of these things were then summed up by him with the wonderful instruction to each one of us:

    “Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’ For the Gentiles seek all these things; and your heavenly Father knows that you need them all. But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things shall be yours as well.” (Matthew 6:31-33)

For the true Christian, nothing is more important than the coming kingdom and our personal preparation for it.

A prime example: the Apostle Paul
The Apostle Paul is just one of many examples of disciples who followed this teaching of their Master. He was involved in politics as much as any man could be. As Saul of Tarsus, he advanced his career by persecuting the followers of Jesus. He was an energetic member of the most active party in the Jewish political world and was almost certainly the holder of a key party office, a kind of roving representative of the Sanhedrin (the top governing body of the Jews in the first century AD). He may even have been a member of the Sanhedrin itself, even though he was still comparatively young. Yet this same man was completely changed by his conversion to Christianity. Once he became a disciple of Christ, his only ambitions in life were, as he put it, to “win Christ” and to “attain unto the resurrection of the dead” (Philippians 3:8,11). As an active disciple of Christ, Paul had no time for anything else. He willingly let go a promising political career to devote himself wholly to Jesus.

As we read Paul’s words, it is important to remember that he was an inspired apostle. He wrote as the mouthpiece of Christ and his words are part of the inspired scriptures. He told of many aspects of the true Christian life, including this issue of whether or not we should become politically engaged in our own day. He said that his words were a matter of commandment – not just some kind of optional advice as to whether we follow the example of Jesus or not. Rather, as he put it in his Letter to the Philippians:

    “Let us hold true to what we have attained. Brethren, join in imitating me, and mark those who so live as you have an example in us.” (Philippians 3:16,17)

Paul warned that there would always be those who refused to behave like Jesus and the apostles; and he characterised them very accurately for us:

    “For many, of whom I have often told you and now tell you even with tears, live as enemies of the cross of Christ. Their end is destruction, their god is the belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things.” (verses 18,19)

Those who are more interested in the things of this present world are the enemies of Christ, however hard this may appear to be. But for those who, like Jesus, look for a kingdom “from another place”, Paul’s reminder is a great comfort, and a helpful guide to what our Christian outlook on the modern world should be.

    “But our commonwealth (citizenship) is in heaven, and from it we await a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who will change our lowly body to be like his glorious body, by the power which enables him even to subject all things to himself.” (verses 20,21)


True citizenship
The Christian’s allegiance is to Jesus Christ as God’s appointed king. “Our citizenship”, for the time being, is in heaven, where Jesus is. We know he will return to this earth to fulfil all God’s promises which are centred in him. These promises, given first to the fathers of the Jewish race like Abraham and David, explain that God intends to centre His worldwide kingdom in Jerusalem, with His laws improving the lot of the world’s population. He sent Jesus to prepare for this time by overcoming sin and death, and promising life and immortality to all who follow him. The political powers of the earth, as the Bible tells us so clearly, are helpless to improve the earth and to bring about the glorious transformation which God has sworn to make.

Psalm 72 speaks of the wonderful things Christ will do at his return. “He shall …” it says, as it records a time of prosperity and peace, of justice and righteousness that the Son of God will bring about on this earth. This is the manifesto worth voting for and giving all of our time and energy to. When he comes it will be the time spoken of by the Apostle John:

    “The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.” (Revelation 11:15)


Allegiance to Christ
In the meantime, the true Christian belongs wholly to Christ, not half-heartedly to this passing world. If he or she is wise, they will give their allegiance to no-one else. Only one man who has ever lived is worthy of such confidence and trust: only Jesus Christ is capable of always doing the right thing and of consistently making the best decisions on our behalf.

It stands to reason that we cannot faithfully serve two masters. So let us make our choice between Christ and the leaders of this world. And if we really want results on which we can depend – peace of mind now, and eternal happiness to come – let us choose Christ as our representative and cast our vote for him, and him alone.

​REG CARR
Scriptural quotations are from the New King James Version®. Copyright © 1982 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
Produced by the South East Queensland Christadelphians
© 2005 SQCCC
$$$

Skip to Berkley Center Navigation
Skip to content
Berkley Center Contact Information Footer
Georgetown University Georgetown University Logo
Berkley Center Logo

    About
    People
    Events
    Topics
    Regions
    News & Media
    Information For

    Home
    Essays
    Christian Beliefs

Translate this text to: 中文
Christian Beliefs
AddThis Sharing Buttons
Share to Facebook
Share to TwitterShare to LinkedInShare to EmailShare to PrintShare to More
Christian beliefs revolve around Jesus of Nazareth and his relationship with God and humanity. Those beliefs tend to vary widely around a central core. A basic Christian belief is that Jesus was God incarnate in human form, at once fully human and fully divine. He is the Son of God, the Messiah (or Christ) prophesied in the Jewish scriptures. The related doctrine of the Trinity, endorsed by most Christians, posits one God in three persons—Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Jesus Christ is the savior who suffered and died for humanity and, through his victory over death in the resurrection, assured his followers of eternal life. Christians believe that God is present and active in the world through the work of the Holy Spirit. Most anticipate divine judgment and the prospect of either heaven or hell for each soul, as well as the Second Coming of Jesus, when humanity will undergo bodily resurrection from the dead and the Last Judgment.

Georgetown University Seal

Berkley Center for Religion,
Peace & World Affairs

3307 M Street NW, Suite 200
Washington, D.C. 20007

Phone: 202-687-5119

Fax: 202-318-0747

Email: berkleycenter@georgetown.edu
Information For

    Educators
    Journalists
    Policymakers
    Religious Leaders and Activists
    Students

Stay Updated

Sign up for our newsletter and event information.
Email Address

    Facebook Twitter Youtube Linkedin Weibo 

Accessibility
$$$


250 thistle logo
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA
250 thistle logo
START YOUR FREE TRIAL
Log In · Join

    Demystified Quizzes #WTFact Lists On This Day Biographies Saving Earth 

Search Britannica
What are you looking for?
Search
Browse popular topics:

    Sri Lanka Easter Island Chinese Civil War Barabbas Five-Year Plans 

Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. Chrome store logo
Christianity
Written By:

    Matt Stefon William Richey Hogg Linwood Fredericksen John Hick Jaroslav Jan Pelikan Lawrence E. Sullivan 

…See All Contributors
Last Updated: Mar 14, 2019 See Article History

Christianity, major religion, stemming from the life, teachings, and death of Jesus of Nazareth (the Christ, or the Anointed One of God) in the 1st century ce. It has become the largest of the world’s religions and, geographically, the most widely diffused of all faiths. It has a constituency of more than two billion believers. Its largest groups are the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox churches, and the Protestant churches. The Oriental Orthodox churches constitute one of the oldest branches of the tradition but had been out of contact with Western Christianity and Eastern Orthodoxy from the middle of the 5th century until the late 20th century because of a dispute over Christology (the doctrine of Jesus Christ’s nature and significance). Significant movements within the broader Christian world and sometimes transcending denominational boundaries are Pentecostalism, Charismatic Christianity, Evangelicalism, and fundamentalism. In addition, there are numerous independent churches throughout the world. See also Anglicanism; Baptist; Calvinism; Congregationalism; Evangelical church; Lutheranism; Oriental Orthodoxy; presbyterian; Reformed and Presbyterian churches.
Encyclopædia Britannica: first edition, map of Europe
Read More on This Topic
history of Europe: The organization of late imperial Christianity
Many Roman provincials were Christian higher clergy. Between the legalization of Christianity by Constantine about 313…

This article first considers the nature and development of the Christian religion, its ideas, and its institutions. This is followed by an examination of several intellectual manifestations of Christianity. Finally, the position of Christianity in the world, the relations among its divisions and denominations, its missionary outreach to other peoples, and its relations with other world religions are discussed. For supporting material on various topics, see angel and demon; Bible; biblical literature; canon law; creed; Christology; doctrine and dogma; ecumenism; eschatology; exegesis; faith; grace; heaven; hell; heresy; Jesus Christ; liturgical movement; millennialism; miracle; monasticism; monotheism; New Testament; Old Testament; original sin; papacy; prayer; priesthood; purgatory; sacrament; salvation; schism; scripture; theism; theology; and worship.
The church and its history
The essence and identity of Christianity

At its most basic, Christianity is the faith tradition that focuses on the figure of Jesus Christ. In this context, faith refers both to the believers’ act of trust and to the content of their faith. As a tradition, Christianity is more than a system of religious belief. It also has generated a culture, a set of ideas and ways of life, practices, and artifacts that have been handed down from generation to generation since Jesus first became the object of faith. Christianity is thus both a living tradition of faith and the culture that the faith leaves behind. The agent of Christianity is the church, the community of people who make up the body of believers.

To say that Christianity “focuses” on Jesus Christ is to say that somehow it brings together its beliefs and practices and other traditions in reference to a historical figure. Few Christians, however, would be content to keep this reference merely historical. Although their faith tradition is historical—i.e., they believe that transactions with the divine do not occur in the realm of timeless ideas but among ordinary humans through the ages—the vast majority of Christians focus their faith in Jesus Christ as someone who is also a present reality. They may include many other references in their tradition and thus may speak of “God” and “human nature” or of the “church” and the “world,” but they would not be called Christian if they did not bring their attentions first and last to Jesus Christ.
Facts Matter. Support the truth and unlock all of Britannica’s content.
Start Your Free Trial Today

While there is something simple about this focus on Jesus as the central figure, there is also something very complicated. That complexity is revealed by the thousands of separate churches, sects, and denominations that make up the modern Christian tradition. To project these separate bodies against the background of their development in the nations of the world is to suggest the bewildering variety. To picture people expressing their adherence to that tradition in their prayer life and church-building, in their quiet worship or their strenuous efforts to change the world, is to suggest even more of the variety.

Given such complexity, it is natural that throughout Christian history both those in the tradition and those surrounding it have made attempts at simplification. Two ways to do this have been to concentrate on the “essence” of the faith, and thus on the ideas that are integral to it, or to be concerned with the “identity” of the tradition, and thus on the boundaries of its historical experience.

Modern scholars have located the focus of this faith tradition in the context of monotheistic religions. Christianity addresses the historical figure of Jesus Christ against the background of, and while seeking to remain faithful to, the experience of one God. It has consistently rejected polytheism and atheism.

A second element of the faith tradition of Christianity, with rare exceptions, is a plan of salvation or redemption. That is to say, the believers in the church picture themselves as in a plight from which they need rescue. For whatever reason, they have been distanced from God and need to be saved. Christianity is based on a particular experience or scheme directed to the act of saving—that is, of bringing or “buying back,” which is part of what redemption means, these creatures of God to their source in God. The agent of that redemption is Jesus Christ.

It is possible that through the centuries the vast majority of believers have not used the term essence to describe the central focus of their faith. The term is itself of Greek origin and thus represents only one part of the tradition, one element in the terms that have gone into making up Christianity. Essence refers to those qualities that give something its identity and are at the centre of what makes that thing different from everything else. To Greek philosophers it meant something intrinsic to and inherent in a thing or category of things, which gave it its character and thus separated it from everything of different character. Thus, Jesus Christ belongs to the essential character of Christianity and gives it a unique identity.
Advertisement

If most people are not concerned with defining the essence of Christianity, in practice they must come to terms with what the word essence implies. Whether they are engaged in being saved or redeemed on the one hand, or thinking and speaking about that redemption, its agent, and its meaning on the other, they are concentrating on the essence of their experience. Those who have concentrated from within the faith tradition have also helped to give it its identity. It is not possible to speak of the essence of a historical tradition without referring to how its ideal qualities have been discussed through the ages. Yet one can take up the separate subjects of essence and identity in sequence, being always aware of how they interrelate.
Eath's To-Do List
Christianity
mosaic; Christianity View Media Page

key people

        St. Paul the Apostle
        St. Augustine
        Martin Buber
        Jan Hus
        St. Albertus Magnus
        Nikolaus Ludwig, count von Zinzendorf
        Pseudo-Dionysius The Areopagite
        Sir Sigmund Sternberg
        Vladimir I
        Jerome Of Prague

related topics

        Biblical literature
        Judaism
        Roman Catholicism
        Protestantism
        Eastern Orthodoxy
        Patristic literature
        Christology
        Canon law
        Church year
        Lutheranism

Historical views of the essence
Early views

Jesus and the earliest members of the Christian faith tradition were Jews, and thus they stood in the faith tradition inherited by Hebrew people in Israel and the lands of the Diaspora. They were monotheists, devoted to the God of Israel. When they claimed that Jesus was divine, they had to do so in ways that would not challenge monotheism.
Holy week. Easter. Valladolid. Procession of Nazarenos carry a cross during the Semana Santa (Holy week before Easter) in Valladolid, Spain. Good Friday
Britannica Quiz
Christianity Quiz
Which of the following is present in the Nicene Creed as recited in Roman Catholic and Protestant churches but not in Eastern Orthodox churches?

Insofar as they began to separate or be separated from Judaism, which did not accept Jesus as the Messiah, the earliest Christians expressed certain ideas about the one on whom their faith focused. As with other religious people, they became involved in a search for truth. God, in the very nature of things, was necessarily the final truth. In a reference preserved in the Gospel According to John, however, Jesus refers to himself not only as “the way” and “the life” but also as “the truth.” Roughly, this meant “all the reality there is” and was a reference to Jesus’ participation in the reality of the one God.

From the beginning there were Christians who may not have seen Jesus as the truth or as a unique participant in the reality of God. There have been “humanist” devotees of Jesus, modernist adapters of the truth about the Christ, but even in the act of adapting him to humanist concepts in their day they have contributed to the debate of the essence of Christianity and brought it back to the issues of monotheism and a way of salvation.

It has been suggested that the best way to preserve the essence of Christianity is to look at the earliest documents—the four Gospels and the letters that make up much of the New Testament—which contain the best account of what the earliest Christians remembered, taught, or believed about Jesus Christ. It is presumed that “the simple Jesus” and the “primitive faith” emerge from these documents as the core of the essence. This view has been challenged, however, by the view that the writings that make up the New Testament themselves reflect Jewish and Greek ways of thinking about Jesus and God. They are seen through the experience of different personalities, such as St. Paul the Apostle or the nameless composers—traditionally identified as St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. John—of documents that came to be edited as the Gospels. Indeed, there are not only diverse ways of worship, of polity or governance of the Christian community, and of behaviour pictured or prescribed in the New Testament but also diverse theologies, or interpretations of the heart of the faith. Most believers see these diversities as complementing each other and leave to scholars the argument that the primal documents may compete with and even contradict each other.

Yet there is a core of ideas that all New Testament scholars and believers would agree are central to ancient Christian beliefs. One British scholar, James G. Dunn, for example, says they would all agree that “the Risen Jesus is the Ascended Lord.” That is to say, there would have been no faith tradition and no scriptures had not the early believers thought that Jesus was “Risen,” raised from the dead, and, “Ascended,” somehow above the ordinary plane of mortal and temporal experience. From that simple assertion early Christians could begin to complicate the search for essence.

An immediate question was how to combine the essential focus on Jesus with the essential monotheism. At various points in the New Testament and especially in the works of the Apologists, late 1st- and 2nd-century writers who sought to defend and explain the faith to members of Greco-Roman society, Jesus is identified as the “preexistent Logos.” That is, before there was a historical Jesus born of Mary and accessible to the sight and touch of Jews and others in his own day, there was a Logos—a principle of reason, an element of ordering, a “Word”—that participated in the Godhead and thus existed, but which only preexisted as far as the “incarnate” Logos, the Word that took on flesh and humanity (John 1:1–14), was concerned.

In searching for an essence of truth and the way of salvation, some primitive Jewish Christian groups, such as the Ebionites, and occasional theologians in later ages employed a metaphor of adoption. These theologians used as their source certain biblical passages (e.g., Acts 2:22). Much as an earthly parent might adopt a child, so the divine parent, the one Jesus called abba (Aramaic: “daddy,” or “father”), had adopted him and taken him into the heart of the nature of what it is to be God. There were countless variations of themes such as the preexistent Logos or the concept of adoption, but they provide some sense of the ways the early Apologists carried out their task of contributing to the definition of the essence of their Jesus-focused yet monotheistic faith.

While it is easier to point to diversity than to simplicity or clarity among those who early expressed faith, it must also be said that from the beginning the believers insisted that they were, or were intended to be, or were commanded and were striving to be, united in their devotion to the essence of their faith tradition. There could not have been many final truths, and there were not many legitimate ways of salvation. It was of the essence of their tradition to reject other gods and other ways, and most defining of essence and identity occurred as one set of Christians was concerned lest others might deviate from the essential faith and might, for example, be attracted to other gods or other ways.

While Jesus lived among his disciples and those who ignored or rejected him, to make him the focus of faith or denial presented one type of issue. After the “Risen Jesus” had become the “Ascended Lord” and was no longer a visible physical presence, those at the head of the tradition had a different problem. Jesus remained a present reality to them, and, when they gathered to worship, they believed that he was “in the midst of them.” He was present in their minds and hearts, in the spoken word that testified to him, and also present in some form when they had their sacred meal and ingested bread and wine as his “body and blood.” They created a reality around this experience; if once Judaism was that reality, now Christianity resulted.

The search for the essence of Christianity led people in the Greek world to concentrate on ideas. The focus on Jesus narrowed to ideas, to “beliefs about” and not only “belief in,” and to doctrines. The essence began to be cognitive, referring to what was known, or substantive. As debates over the cognitive or substantive aspects of Jesus’ participation in God became both intense and refined, the pursuit of essences became almost a matter of competition in the minds of the Apologists and the formulators of doctrines in the 3rd through the 6th century. During this time Christians met in council to develop statements of faith, confessions, and creeds. The claimed essence was used in conflict and rivalry with others. Christian Apologists began to speak, both to the Jews and to the other members of the Greco-Roman world, in terms that unfavourably compared their religions to Christianity. The essence also came to be a way to define who had the best credentials and was most faithful. The claim that one had discerned the essence of Christianity could be used to rule out the faithless, the apostate, or the heretic. The believers in the essential truth and way of salvation saw themselves as insiders and others as outsiders. This concept became important after the Christian movement had triumphed in the Roman Empire, which became officially Christian by the late 4th century. To fail to grasp or to misconceive what was believed to be the essence of faith might mean exile, harassment, or even death.

In the early stages of the development of their faith, Christians did something rare if not unique in the history of religion: they adopted the entire scriptural canon of what they now saw to be another faith, Judaism, and embraced the Hebrew Scriptures, which they called the Old Testament. But while doing so, they also incorporated the insistent monotheism of Judaism as part of the essence of their truth and way of salvation, just as they incorporated the Hebrew Scriptures’ story as part of their own identity-giving narrative and experience.

This narrowing of focus on Jesus Christ as truth meant also a complementary sharpening of focus on the way of salvation. There is no purpose in saving someone who does not need salvation. Christianity therefore began to make, through its councils and creeds, theologians and scholars, some attempts at definitive descriptions of what it is to be human. Later some of these descriptions were called “original sin,” the idea that all humans inherited from Adam, the first-created human, a condition that made it impossible for them to be perfect or to please a personal God on their own. While Christians never agreed on a specific teaching on original sin, they did describe as the essence of Christianity the fact that something limited humans and led them to need redemption. Yet the concentration always returned to Jesus Christ as belonging more to the essence of Christianity than did any statements about the human condition.
Detail from Expulsion of Adam and Eve, fresco by Masaccio, c. 1427; in the Brancacci Chapel, Church of Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence.
Detail from Expulsion of Adam and Eve, fresco by Masaccio, c. 1427; in the Brancacci Chapel, Church of Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence.
Scala/Art Resource, New York

The essence of Christianity eventually included statements about the reality to God. Christians inherited from the Jews a relatively intimate picture of a God who made their young and small universe, with its starry heavens, and then carried on discourse with humans, making covenants with them and rewarding or punishing them. But the Greek part of their tradition contributed the concept of a God who was greater than any ideas of God but who had to be addressed through ideas. Indeed, it was during this time that words such as essence, substance, and being—terms that did not belong to the Old or New Testament traditions—came to be wedded to biblical witness in the creeds. Christians used the vocabulary and repertory of options then available to them in speaking of the all-encompassing and the ineffable and grafted these onto the witness to God that was essential to their faith. Contemporary Christians, including many who reject the notion of creeds or any non-biblical language, are still left with the problems and intentions of the ancients: how to think of Jesus in such a way that they are devoted to him not in isolation, as an end in himself—for that would be idolatry of a human—but in the context of the total divine reality.

It is impossible to chronicle the efforts at expressing essence without pointing to diversity within the unity. Yet the belief in final unity belongs to any claims of finding an essence. Thus it was both a typical and a decisive moment when in the 5th century St. Vincent of Lérins, a Gallo-Roman theologian, provided a formula according to which Christianity expressed a faith that “has been believed everywhere, always, and by all” (quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est). Even if not all Christians could agree on all formulations, it was widely held that there was some fundamental “thing” that had thus been believed.
More About This Topic

    History of Europe: Christian mystics
    History of Europe: Christianity, Judaism, and Islam
    History of Europe: The organization of late imperial Christianity
    Biblical literature: Biblical literature in the liturgy of Christianity
    Judaism: Jewish-Christian relations
    Judaism: Relation to Christianity
    Judaism: Contribution of Haggada to Christian and Islamic legends
    Judaism: Origin of Christianity: the early Christians and the Jewish community
    Spain: Christian Spain from the Muslim invasion to about 1260
    Ancient Rome: The rise of Christianity

Medieval and Reformation views

For a thousand years, a period that began with what some historians called the “Dark Ages” in the Christian West and that endured through both the Eastern and Western extensions of the Roman Empire, the essence of Christian faith was guarded differently than it had been in the first three centuries, before Christianity became official; throughout the Middle Ages itself the understanding of the essence evolved. In the 4th and 5th centuries, theologians including St. Ambrose, St. Augustine of Hippo, and St. Jerome laid the foundations for the development of Christian thought. By the 5th century, the bishop of Rome, the pope, as a result of conciliar decisions and unique events in Rome, had become the leading spokesman for the faith in Latin, or Western, Christendom. This position would assume greater institutional strength in later periods of the Middle Ages. In the Eastern churches, despite the claims of the patriarch of Constantinople, no single pontiff ruled over the bishops, but they saw themselves just as surely and energetically in command of the doctrines that made up the essence of Christianity.

The Western drama, especially after the year 1000, was more fateful for Christianity in the modern world. The pope and the bishops of Latin Christendom progressively determined the essence through doctrines and canons that enhanced the ancient grasp of faith. As they came to dominate in Europe, they sought to suppress contrary understandings of the essence of the faith. In the 14th and 15th centuries, Jews were confined to ghettos, segregated and self-segregated enclaves where they did not and could not share the full prerogatives of Christendom. When sects were defined as heretical—Waldenses, Cathari, and others—because of their repudiation of Roman Catholic concepts of Christian essence, they had to go into hiding or were pushed into enclaves beyond the reach of the custodians of official teaching. The essence of Christianity had become a set of doctrines and laws articulated and controlled by a hierarchy that saw those doctrines as a divine deposit of truth. Theologians might argue about the articulations with great subtlety and intensity, but in that millennium few would have chosen to engage in basic disagreement over the official teachings, all of which were seen to be corollaries of the basic faith in Jesus Christ as participating in the truth of God and providing the way of salvation.

Through these centuries there was also increasing differentiation between the official clergy, which administered the sacraments and oversaw the body of the faithful, and the laity. Most of what was debated centuries later about the essence of medieval Christianity came from the records of these authorities. As more is learned about the faith of the ordinary believers, it becomes more evident in the records of social history that people offered countless variations on the essence of the faith. Many people used the church’s officially legitimated faith in the power of saints’ relics to develop patterns of dealing with God that, according to the Protestant reformers, detracted from the uniqueness of Jesus Christ as the only agent of salvation.

During this thousand years in both Western and Eastern Christianity, when the faith had a cultural monopoly, there was an outburst of creativity and a fashioning of a Christian culture that greatly enhanced and complicated any once-simple notions of an essence. Christianity was as much a cultural tradition as it was a faith tradition, an assertion that the leadership of the medieval church would not have regarded as diminishing or insulting. Christianity as a cultural tradition is perhaps most vividly revealed in the magnificent cathedrals and churches that were built in the Middle Ages and in the illuminated manuscripts of the period.

As Christian culture grew ever more complex, however, there arose a constant stream of individual reformers who tried to get back to what they thought was its original essence. Among these was St. Francis of Assisi, who in his personal style of devotion and simple way of life was often seen as capturing in his person and teachings more of the original essence of Jesus’ truth and way of salvation than did the ordained authorities in the church and empires. Unlike the Waldenses and members of other dissident groups, Francis accepted the authority of the ordained clergy and contributed to a reform and revival of the broader church.

In the late Middle Ages a number of dissenters emerged—such as Jan Hus in Bohemia, John Wycliffe in England, and Girolamo Savonarola in Florence—who challenged the teachings of the church in more radical ways than someone like St. Francis did. For all their differences, they were united in their critique of what they thought complicated the essence of Christianity. On biblical prophetic grounds they sought simplicity in the cognitive, moral, and devotional life of Christianity.

When the Protestant Reformation divided Western Christianity—as Eastern Christians, already separated since the 11th century, looked on—the 16th-century European world experienced a foretaste of the infinite Christian variety to come. The reforms that gave rise to the many Protestant bodies—Lutheran, Anglican, Presbyterian, Reformed, Anabaptist, Quaker, and others—were themselves debates over the essence of Christianity. Taken together, they made it increasingly difficult for any one to claim a monopoly on the custodianship of that essence, try as they might. Each new sect offered a partial discernment of a different essence or way of speaking of it, even if the vast majority of Protestants agreed that the essence could be retrieved best, or, indeed uniquely, through recovery of the central message of the Scriptures.

After the ferment of the Reformation, most of the dissenting groups, as they established themselves in various nations, found it necessary to engage in their own narrowing of focus, rendering of precise doctrines, and understanding of divine truth and the way of salvation. Within a century theologians at many Protestant universities were adopting systems that paralleled the old scholasticisms against which some reformers had railed. Those who had once thought that definition of doctrine failed to capture the essence of Christianity were now defining their concept of the essence in doctrinal terms but were doing so for Lutherans, Reformed, Presbyterians, and even more radical dissenters and resistors of creeds, such as the Anabaptists.

The belief of St. Vincent of Lérins that there is a faith that has been held by everyone, always and everywhere, lived on through the proliferation of Protestant denominations and Roman Catholic movements and, in sophisticated ways, has helped animate the modern ecumenical movement. Thus, some have spoken of that movement as a reunion of churches, an idea that carries an implication that they had once been “one,” and a further hint that one included an essence on which people agreed. Reunion, then, would mean a stripping away of accretions, a reducing of the number of arguments, and a refocusing on essentials.
Similar Topics

    Hinduism
    Buddhism
    Islam
    Daoism
    Sikhism
    Confucianism
    Roman religion
    Jainism
    Zoroastrianism
    Middle Eastern religion

Modern views

The modern church and world brought new difficulties to the quest for defining an essence of Christianity. Both as a result of Renaissance humanism, which gloried in human achievement and encouraged human autonomy, and of Reformation ideas that believers were responsible in conscience and reason for their faith, an autonomy in expressing faith developed. Some spoke of Protestantism as being devoted to the right of private judgment. Roman Catholics warned that believers who did not submit to church authority would issue as many concepts of essence as there were believers to make the claims.

In the 18th century the Western philosophical movement called the Enlightenment further obscured searches for the essence of Christianity. The Enlightenment proclaimed optimistic views of human reach and perfectibility that challenged formerly essential Christian views of human limits. The Deity became a benevolent if impersonal force, not an agent that arranged a way of salvation to people in need of rescue. The Enlightenment also urged a view of human autonomy and of the use of reason in a search for truth. But, in the view of Enlightenment thinkers, reason did not need to be responsive to supernatural revelation, as contained in the Old and New Testaments. Indeed, reason questioned the integrity of those scriptures themselves through methods of historical and literary criticism. No longer should one rely on the word of priests who passed on notions of essential Christianity.

While many Westerners moved out of the orbit of faith as a result of the Enlightenment and the rise of criticism, many others—in Germany, France, England, Scotland, and, eventually, the Americas—remained Christians, people of faith if now of faith differently expressed. Some Christians, the Unitarians, rejected the ideas of both a preexistent Logos made incarnate in Christ and a Jesus adopted into the Godhead. Jesus was seen as the great teacher or exemplar. They thus also tested the boundaries of essential teaching about a way of salvation. And at the heart of Deist Christianity was a view of God that remained “mono-” in that it was devoted to a single principle, but as “deist” instead of “theist” it departed from the ancient picture of a personal God engaged in human affairs. These were blows to the integrity of St. Vincent of Lérins’s concept and more reasons for the orthodox to use Vincent’s concept to exclude Unitarians, Deists, and other innovators from the circle of Christianity.

In the 19th century philosophical and historical criticism inspired some Christians to renew the search for essences. For example, in the wake of the German idealist philosopher G.W.F. Hegel, Hegelian scholars tried to rescue Christianity by viewing it as an unfolding of “absolute spirit.” They followed Christian history through a constant dialectic, a series of forces and counterforces producing new syntheses. A problem with the Hegelian approach arose as the historical Jesus came to be seen merely as one stage in the unfolding of absolute spirit; he was not a decisive agent of the way of salvation “once for all,” as the biblical Letter to the Hebrews had claimed him to be. Soon biblical scholars such as David Friedrich Strauss were speaking of the historical Jesus as a myth of a certain set of people in one moment of the dialectical unfolding. The Christian faith itself began to dissolve, and many Hegelians began to reject the God of the Christian faith along with the historical Jesus.

Another group of 19th-century theologians took the opposite course. In the spirit of the 18th-century German philosopher Immanuel Kant, these neo-Kantians spoke not of the noumenal world, the unseen realm of essences beyond visible reality, but of the phenomenal realm, the world of history in which things happened. Theologians in this school engaged in a century-long “quest for the historical Jesus,” in which they sought the simple essence of Christianity. Significantly, the greatest exemplar of this historical tradition, the German theologian Adolf von Harnack, wrote one of the best-known modern books on the essence of Christianity, Das Wesen des Christentums (1900; What Is Christianity?).

The call had come to purge Christianity of what Harnack called traces of “acute Hellenization,” the Greek ideas of essence, substance, and being that were introduced into the Christian tradition in its early history. The focus was shifted to the fatherhood of God and the announcement of the kingdom, as Jesus had proclaimed in the Gospels. While this approach matched the thirst for simplification in the minds of many of the Christian faithful, it also diminished the concept of God. The result was a form of Christian humanism that more traditional Christians regarded as a departure from the essence of Christianity. This view claimed to be based on the historical Jesus, but scholars could not agree on the details.

Throughout the modern period some thinkers took another route toward expressing the essence of Christianity. The notion that the theologians would never find the essence of Christianity grew among German Pietists, among the followers of John Wesley into Methodism, and in any number of Roman Catholic or Protestant devotional movements. Instead, according to these groups, the Christian essence was discernible in acts of piety, closeness to the fatherly heart of God as shown in the life of Jesus, and intimate communion with God on emotional or affective—not cognitive, rational, or substantial (i.e., doctrinal)—grounds. Although these pietisms have been immensely satisfying to millions of modern believers, they have been handicapped in the intellectual arena when pressed for the definitions people need in a world of choice.

Some modern Christians have shifted the topic from the essence of Christianity to its absoluteness among the religions. They have been moved by what the Germans called Religionswissenschaft, the study of world religions. In that school, the focus fell on the sacred, what the German theologian Rudolf Otto called “the idea of the Holy.” On those terms, as the German scholar Ernst Troeltsch showed, it was more difficult to speak of the “absoluteness” of Christianity and its truth; one had to speak of it on comparative terms. Yet some early 20th-century comparativists, such as the Swedish Lutheran archbishop Nathan Söderblom, applied their understanding of the study of religion to help animate the movement for Christian reunion.

The ecumenical movement that arose in the 20th century was based upon the belief that the church has different cultural expressions that must be honoured and differing confessional or doctrinal traditions designed to express the essential faith. These traditions demand criticism, comparison, and perhaps revision, with some possible blending toward greater consensus in the future. At the same time, supporters of the movement have shown that, among Christians of good will, elaborations of what constitutes the essence of Christianity are as confusing as they are inevitable and necessary.

Despite this confusion, the ecumenical movement was an important development in the 20th century. It took institutional form in the World Council of Churches in 1948, which was composed of Protestant, Eastern Orthodox, and Oriental Orthodox churches. The World Council emerged out of two organizations that offered distinct approaches to the essential concepts of the faith. One approach was devoted first to “Life and Work,” a view that the essentials of Christianity could be best found and expressed when people followed the way or did the works of Christ, since this constituted his essence. The other approach, concerned with “Faith and Order,” stressed the need for comparative study of doctrine, with critical devotion to the search for what was central. By no means did these groups cling any longer to the notion that when they found unity they would have found a simple essence of Christianity. Yet they believed that they could find compatible elements that would help to sustain them on the never-ending search for what was central to the faith tradition.

Some modern scholars—for example, the British theologian John Hick—viewing the chaos of languages dealing with the essentials of the faith and the complex of historical arguments, pose the understanding of the essence in the future. They speak of “eschatological verification,” referring to the end, the time beyond history, or the time of fulfillment. In that future, one might say, it will have become possible to assess the claims of faith. Theologians of these schools argue that such futuristic notions motivate Christians and the scholars among them to clarify their language, refine their historical understandings, and focus their devotion and spirituality.

    Introduction
    The church and its history
        The essence and identity of Christianity
            Historical views of the essence
            The question of Christian identity
        The history of Christianity
            The primitive church
            The internal development of the early Christian church
            Relations between Christianity and the Roman government and the Hellenistic culture
            The early liturgy, the calendar, and the arts
            The alliance between church and empire
            Theological controversies of the 4th and 5th centuries
            Liturgy and the arts after Constantine
            Political relations between East and West
            Literature and art of the “Dark Ages”
            Missions and monasticism
            The Photian schism and the great East-West schism
        From the schism to the Reformation
            Papacy and empire
            Medieval thought
            Reformation
        Christianity from the 16th to the 21st century
        Contemporary Christianity
            Roman Catholicism
            The Eastern churches
            Protestantism
        Christian doctrine
            The nature and functions of doctrine
            Scripture and tradition: the apostolic witness
            Evangelism: the first teaching about the God of Jesus Christ
            Catechesis: instructing candidates for baptism
            Liturgy: the school and feast of faith
            Ethics: obeying the truth
            Aversion of heresy: the establishment of orthodoxy
            Apologetics: defending the faith
            Restatement: respecting language and knowledge
            Inculturation: respecting places and peoples
            Dogma: the most authoritative teaching
            Consensus: patterns of agreement
            Theology: loving God with the mind
            Symbolics: creeds and confessions
            Development: the maturation of understanding
            Schism: division over substantial matters
            Controversy: fighting over the faith
            Ecumenism: speaking the truth in love
        God the Father
            Characteristic features of the Christian concept of God
            The specific concept of God as Father
            The belief in the oneness of the Father and the Son
            The revelatory character of God
            God as Creator, Sustainer, and Judge
            The view that God is not solitary
            Modern views of God
            Satan and the origin of evil
        God the Son
            Different interpretations of the person of Jesus
            The Christological controversies
            Messianic views
            The doctrine of the Virgin Mary and holy Wisdom
        God the Holy Spirit
            Contradictory aspects of the Holy Spirit
            Conflict between order and charismatic freedom
            The operations of the Holy Spirit
        The Holy Trinity
            The basis for the doctrine of the Trinity
            Introduction of Neoplatonic themes
            Attempts to define the Trinity
        Anthropology
            What it is to be human
            The human as a creature
            The human as the image of God
            Human redemption
            The problem of suffering
            The resurrection of the body
            Progressive human perfection
            The “new man”: The human being in the light of Christ
            The “reborn human”
            Human liberation
            Joy in human existence
            The charismatic believer
            Christian perfection
            Fellow humans as the present Christ
        The church
            Normative defenses in the early church
            Evolution of the episcopal office
            Authority and dissent
            Organization
            Church polity
            Liturgy
            New liturgical forms and antiliturgical attitudes
        Church tradition
            The sacraments
            Scriptural traditions
            Veneration of places, objects, and people
            Monasticism
            The saintly life
            Art and iconography
            Theology of icons
        Eschatology
            Expectations of the Kingdom of God in early Christianity
            Expectations of the Kingdom of God in the medieval and Reformation periods
            Expectations of the Kingdom of God in the post-Reformation period
            The role of imminent expectation in missions and emigrations
            Eschatological expectations and secularization
            Concepts of life after death
    Aspects of the Christian religion
        Christian philosophy
            History of the interactions of philosophy and theology
            Faith and reason
            Christian philosophy as natural theology
            20th-century discussions
        Christian mysticism
            History of Christian mysticism
            Stages of Christian mysticism
            Forms of Christian mysticism
            Significance of Christian mysticism
        Christian myth and legend
            Characteristics of Christian myth and legend
            History of Christian myth and legend
    The Christian community and the world
        The relationships of Christianity
            Historical views
            Church, sect, and mystical movement
            Church and state
            Church and society
            Church and education
            Church and social welfare
            Church and minorities
            Church and family
            Church and the individual
        Christian missions
            Biblical foundations
            The history of Christian missions
        Ecumenism
            The biblical perspective
            The history of ecumenism
        Christianity and world religions
            Conflicting Christian attitudes
            Contemporary views

Inspire your inbox – Sign up for daily fun facts about this day in history, updates, and special offers.
By signing up for this email, you are agreeing to news, offers, and information from Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Click here to view our Privacy Notice. Easy unsubscribe links are provided in every email.
Stay Connected

    About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Notice Terms of Use 


©2019 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Contents
Christianity
Article
Media
Info
Print
Print
Please select which sections you would like to print:

    Table Of Contents
    Introduction
    The church and its history
    Aspects of the Christian religion
    The Christian community and the world

Cite
Share
SHARE
Feedback
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login).
Select feedback type:
Britannica Examines Earth's Greatest Challenges
Earth's To-Do List
$$$


Explore God
Watch
Read
Topics
Discuss
Resources
Language
Login/Join
Log In

Keep me logged in
Don't have an account?
Click here to Join »
Join

I agree to the Community Guidelines
Already have an account?
« Click here to Log In
Log In With Your Social Account

Haven't linked your account?
Click here to Join »
header image for 'What Is Christian Marriage?'
  Google +       Embed
What Is Christian Marriage?
By:  R. Robert Creech, Ph.D.

We hear a lot about Christian marriages being different, but what is it that makes a marriage "Christian"?

    "A good marriage would be between a blind wife and a deaf husband."
    Michel de Montaigne1

Marriage has gotten quite a bad reputation over the years. The butt of a seemingly infinite number of jokes, matrimony is a source of endless social commentary, gender politics, and governmental debate.

    "Love: A temporary insanity curable by marriage."
    Ambrose Bierce2

In the United States, marriage has fallen upon particularly hard times. Fewer and fewer people are choosing to marry.4 In fact, less than half of current US households are made up of married couples.5 The percentage of Americans who have never married is growing6 while the number of couples living together without marrying is increasing exponentially.7 Meanwhile, more and more children are born to single mothers.8

    "One should always be in love. That’s the reason one should never marry."
    Oscar Wilde3

To top it all off, America still has the highest divorce rate among Western nations and the highest incidence of single-parent families of any industrialized nation.9 There’s no denying that the landscape of the American family has changed radically over the past fifty years.
Marriage and Culture

These statistics raise questions about the value and meaning of marriage in contemporary American culture. Given changes in reproductive technology, shifts in cultural attitudes about sexual morality, and the apparent failure of marriage as an ideal relationship, has marriage become irrelevant?

Though it might seem so, sociologists Mark Regnerus and Jeremy Ueker recently reported that the American youth are as interested in marriage as at any time—more than 95 percent intend to marry someday.10

But from romance novels to reality TV to movies, unrealistic expectations and false understandings about love, marriage, and romance are easily perpetuated. As a result, both those seeking out a marriage partner and those trying to stay in a marriage relationship struggle with misunderstandings of the definition of that relationship itself.

Can the Christian faith make a difference in this understanding and the quest for a meaningful marriage?
Marriage and Faith

Though marriage is not the distinctive domain of the Christian church, the Bible and influential Christian thinkers do have quite a bit to say on the matter.11 So what makes a marriage a Christian marriage?

Clearly, simply being religious or professing Christian beliefs isn’t a cure-all; it doesn’t guarantee a long-lasting, blissful marriage. To answer our questions, we must look at the essential elements of Christian marriage and see how they differ from other approaches to the marriage relationship.

As early as the first century, Christian writers have commented on the relationship between their faith and marriage. One writer, Paul, penned these words:

Husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself. After all, no one ever hated their own body, but they feed and care for their body, just as Christ does the church—for we are members of his body. “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.” This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church. However, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.13

In these verses, Paul compares the relationship between husband and wife to the relationship between Jesus and the church. This has incredibly important implications for the nature of Christian marriage.
The Covenant of Marriage

Christians approach marriage as a covenant, a relationship based on promises and commitment, not just feelings—though love is most certainly involved.14

The concept of marriage as a covenant is rooted in the Hebrew faith, and early Christians preserved the belief as well.15 God’s covenant with Israel was founded on his promise to be faithful to Israel. The Hebrew people promised faithfulness to God as well, though the Bible doesn’t hide that they struggled—and often failed—to keep that pledge. Like God with the Israelites, Jesus established what he called a “new covenant” with his followers.16

To speak of marriage as a covenant is to say that the partners make mutual promises about the way they will choose to live in the future, not just declarations of how they feel in the present. The endeavor to live into those promises—remaining faithful to their covenant—will shape their characters over the years.
Christian Love

Christian marriage is also distinctively based on agapē, the Greek word used in Jesus’ teachings and early Christian writings to describe the kind of love God expresses to human beings. Agapē has nothing to do with the fanciful concepts of romantic love upon which so many American cultural marriage myths are founded.

Despite how pleasurable such feelings may be at the outset of a relationship, they seldom have the staying power to withstand a lifetime of ups and downs—the “for better or for worse” of matrimony.17

Agapē is an entirely different concept, so important that Paul devoted a whole section of his first letter to the Corinthians to defining it.You may have heard a well-known phrase from this section: “Love is patient, love is kind.” Paul then goes on to describe agapē as a sacrificial way of loving others.18

This kind of unconditional love—or an active striving to live out this kind of love daily—marks a genuinely Christian marriage, just as it characterizes an authentically Christian life.19 Agapē is found in an active choice one makes about how to behave toward another, not a conditional feeling one has toward someone.20 Agapē is based on the deliberate choices of the lover, not the responses of the beloved.
Christ-Centered Marriage

Perhaps the most distinct characteristic of Christian marriage—which makes the other two possible—is that it is intentionally centered on Jesus Christ. Each spouse continuously works to know, love, and obey Jesus, and to follow his example.

In this way, husband and wife learn how to express agapē and remain faithful to their covenant. As they practice the Christian faith together, they move toward each other, growing together in love and unity.

But what about a marriage in which only one spouse is a follower of Jesus? Could that marriage ever be a “Christian marriage”?

Paul actually writes about such a case in 1 Corinthians 7:12–16.21 He urges the believing partner to stay married to their unbelieving spouse because of the believer’s influence on their partner and children. One person who is seeking to follow Jesus Christ, learning to live out of agapē, and keeping the promises of the covenant brings Christ’s presence into the marriage.
Constant Pursuit

Christian or not, marriage is difficult for any couple to sustain over a lifetime. Life’s trials—the pressure of making a living, of parenting, of resisting temptations to unfaithfulness or selfishness—can strain any marriage.

But Christian marriage offers hope. The hope that a husband and wife, by intentionally choosing to learn how to love faithfully and sacrificially as Jesus did, may keep their covenant promises for a lifetime.

    Footnotes
    Embed This Article

  Google +      

    Related

Comments

    Related Articles
    What is love?
    What Is Love?

    There is something innate in us that longs to be loved, but what exactly are we longing for?

    The Christian View of Divorce
    The Christian View of Divorce

    Divorce can be hard on everyone involved—but is divorce an unforgivable sin?

    What is Christianity?
    What Is Christianity?

    Where did Christianity come from? How did it begin? What is it?

    What is Faith?
    What Is Faith?

    Faith is an integral part of the Christian life. But what is faith?

    What is the gospel?
    What Is the Gospel?

    What do religion and the gospel have in common? Absolutely nothing.

    Related Videos
    What is the meaning of life?
    What Is the Meaning of Life?

    Differing views on what and if there is meaning and purpose to our lives.

    What is the Bible?
    What Is the Bible?

    What makes up the best-selling and most controversial book in print?

    Is Love a Feeling?
    Is Love a Feeling?

    Love is more than something we feel—it's something we do. Andy Crouch talks about the purpose of life and how we fulfill that purpose through the act of love.

    What is Truth?
    What Is Truth?

    Whether or not you want to think about the truth, it matters. Explore more here.

    Is the World Better Without Christianity?
    Is the World Better without Christianity?

    Is Christianity just another religion that manipulates our culture? Bryan Winchester distinguishes between being a Christian and being a Christ-follower.

✖
Log In

Keep me logged in
Don't have an account?
Click here to Join »
Forgot your password?
Click here to reset it.
Join

I agree to the Community Guidelines
Already have an account?
« Click here to Log In
Log In With Your Social Account
Home About Us Contact Privacy Policy Community Guidelines Donate

© 2019 Explore God
$$$

Cookies on the BBC website

We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue without changing your settings, we'll assume that you are happy to receive all cookies on the BBC website. However, if you would like to, you can change your cookie settings at any time.

    Find out more

British Broadcasting CorporationBBC

Accessibility links

    Skip to content
    Skip to local navigation
    Skip to bbc.co.uk navigation
    Skip to bbc.co.uk search
    Accessibility Help

This page has been archived and is no longer updated. Find out more about page archiving.

Religions
The basics of Christian history

Last updated 2009-06-08

Christian history begins with the life and death of Jesus Christ and continues with the formation of the early Christian church, Emperor Constantine's Holy Roman Empire and the great schism into Eastern and Western Christianity.
On this page

    Life and death of Jesus
    Paul and the early church
    Roman Empire
    Find out more

Page options

    Print this page

Life and death of Jesus

This history of Christianity is focussed on the life, death and resurrection of one person, Jesus Christ, the son of God.
Early Christian painting of Jesus Early painting of Jesus ©
Background to the life and death of Jesus Christ

The traditional story of Jesus tells of his birth in a stable in Bethlehem in the Holy Land, to a young virgin called Mary who had become pregnant with the son of God through the action of the Holy Spirit.

The story of Jesus' birth is told in the writings of Matthew and Luke in the New Testament of the Bible.

His birth is believed by Christians to be the fulfilment of prophecies in the Jewish Old Testament, which claimed that a Messiah would deliver the Jewish people from captivity.
Jesus' ministry

After the story of his birth, little is known about Jesus until he began his ministry at the age of about 30.

He then spent three years teaching, healing and working miracles.

He taught in parables - everyday stories which had divine messages for those who would hear it.

He had twelve disciples whom he called to follow him and help him in his work.
Persecution and death

Jesus stated publicly that he spoke with the authority of God.

This claim angered the religious authorities in Palestine and they handed Jesus over to the Roman authorities as a revolutionary.

He was tried for heresy, condemned and put to death by means of crucifixion.
Resurrection

On the Sunday following his execution, some of his women followers discovered that the tomb into which his body had been placed was empty.

Jesus then appeared to them, alive, as the Jesus they had known prior to his death. His followers realised that God had raised Jesus from the dead.

Jesus was seen by many of his disciples and followers over the next few days before, according to the Gospel accounts, he was taken up into heaven.
Top
Paul and the early church
Early painting of Saint Paul Saint Paul ©

It has been suggested that the work of Jesus Christ and the impact of his death and resurrection would not have made any lasting impact on the world were it not for the missionary work of Paul.

The account of Paul's conversion to Christianity is contained in the New Testament book, the Acts of the Apostles.

Before his conversion Paul had been known as Saul and had been violently opposed to the Christian faith as taught by Jesus and after his death, by his disciples.

Saul experienced a dramatic conversion, known as the Damascus Road conversion, when he was temporarily blinded.

He found himself filled with the Holy Spirit and immediately began preaching the Christian gospel.
Paul's concept of Christianity

Paul's teaching centred on understanding the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ as a central turning point in history.

He understood the resurrection to signal the end of the need to live under Jewish law.

Instead Paul taught of living in the Spirit in which the power of God was made to work through human flesh.

Some of his letters to fledgling churches throughout the Roman Empire are contained in the New Testament and outline Paul's theology.

He insisted that Gentiles had as much access to the faith as Jews and that freedom from the Law set everyone free.

It was this teaching which was essential for the development and success of the early church which would otherwise have remained nothing more than another Jewish sect.
Top
Roman Empire

Paul established Christian churches throughout the Roman Empire, including Europe, and beyond - even into Africa.
Persecution

However, in all cases, the church remained small and was persecuted, particularly under tyrannical Roman emperors like Nero (54-68), Domitian (81-96), under whom being a Christian was an illegal act, and Diocletian (284-305).

Many Christian believers died for their faith and became martyrs for the church (Bishop Polycarp and St Alban amongst others).
Bust of Constantine Emperor Constantine ©
Constantine turns the tide

When a Roman soldier, Constantine, won victory over his rival in battle to become the Roman emperor, he attributed his success to the Christian God and immediately proclaimed his conversion to Christianity.

Christianity became the official religion of the Roman Empire.

Constantine then needed to establish exactly what the Christian faith was and called the First Council of Nicea in 325 AD which formulated and codified the faith.
Formulating the faith

Over the next few centuries, there were debates and controversies about the precise interpretation of the faith, as ideas were formulated and discussed.

The Council of Chalcedon held in 451 was the last council held whilst the Roman Empire was intact. It gave rise to the Nicene Creed which Christians still say today to affirm their belief in God, Christ and his church.

When Rome fell in 476, it meant that Western and Eastern Christians were no longer under the same political rule and differences in belief and practice arose between them.
The Great Schism

The differences between Eastern and Western Christianity culminated in what has been called the Great Schism, in 1054, when the patriarchs of the Eastern and Western division (of Constantinople and Rome respectively) were unable to resolve their differences.

The split led to the Orthodox church and the Roman Catholic church.

The Orthodox church does not recognise the authority of the Roman papacy and claims a Christian heritage in direct descent from the Christian church of Christ's believers.
Top
Find out more

    Christianity reaches the UK
    Christian beliefs about Jesus
    The historical Jesus
    The Passion of Christ
    Christmas, the festival of Jesus's birth
    Jesus's disciples
    Saint Paul
    Orthodox Church
    Roman Catholic Church

Top
«
More Christianity
See also

    Religion and Ethics home
    Interfaith calendar
    Ethics guides

Elsewhere on the web

    Early Christian Writings

BBC iD
Sign in

Search term:
BBC navigation

    News
    Sport
    Weather
    iPlayer
    TV
    Radio
    More…

BBC links

        Mobile site Terms of Use About the BBC 
        Privacy Accessibility Help 
        Cookies Contact the BBC 
        Parental Guidance 

BBC

BBC © 2014 The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read more.
$$$

Christianity Today

    Who We Are
    What We Do
    Newsletters
    Give Now

https://grow.pushpay.com/lp-ebook-27-facebook-ad-templates-ven.html?utm_medium=display-paid&utm_source=christianity-today&utm_content=content-ebook&utm_campaign=plug-and-play-fb-ad-templates&utm_term=faith--all--all--pastors--728x90
Christianity Today
Log in|Shop

    Sections Our LatestThe Magazine Subscribe

Trending

    News
    Died: Warren Wiersbe, Preachers’ Favorite Bible Commentator
    Caleb Lindgren
    News
    Terrorists in Burkina Faso Execute Six at Pentecostal Church
    Kate Shellnutt
    Jean Vanier Made Us All More Human
    Bethany McKinney Fox
    How the Bible Project Is Using Video to Get People into Scripture Again
    Paul J. Pastor
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Mark Galli

Testimony
I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
How a gang leader found salvation in prison.
Casey Diaz| April 22, 2019
I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
Image: Christopher Fragapane

In prison, I was a shot caller.
The Shot Caller: A Latino Gangbanger’s Miraculous Escape from a Life of Violence to a New Life in Christ
The Shot Caller: A Latino Gangbanger’s Miraculous Escape from a Life of Violence to a New Life in Christ
Casey Diaz
Thomas Nelson
2019-04-02
224 pp., $11.90
Buy The Shot Caller: A Latino Gangbanger’s Miraculous Escape from a Life of Violence to a New Life in Christ from Amazon
Current Issue
May 2019
Subscribe
May
Read This Issue

    Young Life at the BorderMissions Experts Are Redefining ‘Unreached People Groups’Fitness Trackers, Dating Apps, and Other Ladders to NowhereSubscriber access only

Free Newsletters
Get the best from CT editors, delivered straight to your inbox! [Stay informed with updates from CT Direct, CT Weekly, CT Women, Books & Culture and Gallireport newsletters]
More Newsletters

Shot callers have an elevated rank in the gang world. They are the power-brokers who determine who gets hurt (or killed) and who doesn’t. They command respect.

I started down this path as a teenager in South-Central Los Angeles, as a leader in the Rockwood Street Locos. I led the way when we invaded homes, broke into cars, ransacked convenience stores, and stabbed rival gang members. It didn’t take me long to figure out that the streets were bloody. Most of the time, it was kill or be killed.

Eventually, the LAPD caught up with me. I was sentenced to nearly 13 years for second-degree murder—along with 52 counts of armed robbery. I actually breathed a sigh of relief that those were the only charges the cops could pin on me.
Life Was Very Cheap

While awaiting transfer to New Folsom State Prison—a Level IV maximum security prison near Sacramento, California—I was housed with 120 murderers and violent criminals inside Pitchess Detention Center, north of Los Angeles.

At Pitchess, we segregated ourselves: blacks aligning with blacks, whites with whites, and Latinos with Latinos. Several dudes from two long-established gangs, 18th Street and Florencia 13, approached me about becoming a shot caller there.

One of my responsibilities was the control and distribution of shanks, the crude homemade knives used for stabbing another prisoner. I slept with all 13 of them under my mattress. When a riot went off, I made sure the right people got shanks. There were many violent upheavals at Pitchess, and inmates got stabbed and killed all the time. All it took was a wrong look at the wrong person, and you were done for. Life was very cheap.

After about six months, I was transferred to New Folsom State Prison. When the bus dropped us off at the main building, I saw guards pacing on catwalks, their arms cradling Mini-14s—small, lightweight semi-automatic rifles.

The warden, standing next to a phalanx of serious-looking guards in riot gear, cleared his throat. “I want you to look at the sign to your right,” he said. My eyes alighted on a white sign with red lettering that read, “No Warning Shots Fired.” “In case of a riot,” the warden continued, “we will not be aiming at your feet, we will not be aiming at your legs, and we will not be aiming at your torso. We will be aiming directly at your head to kill you.”

When the warden was gone, a guard approached me with a manila file in hand. “Diaz, follow me,” he ordered. I was led inside the prison to an interview room, where the guard introduced himself as a gang coordinator. “Listen closely, Diaz,” he said. “We know that you’re a banger and a shot caller, so we’re putting you in solitary.”
https://grow.pushpay.com/lp-ebook-toxic-leadership-vendor.html?utm_medium=display-paid&utm_source=christianity-today&utm_content=content-ebook&utm_campaign=toxic-leadership&utm_term=faith--all--all--vendor--pastors--300x250

I would be cooped up in an eight-by-ten-foot windowless box, with all my meals slipped in through a slot in the steel door (or “gate”). Social interactions with other inmates (and guards) would be nearly nonexistent.

The only source of illumination in my cell was a heavy Plexiglas light that couldn’t be turned off, which made it difficult to get any sleep. And without a clock or wristwatch to consult, I had trouble distinguishing whether it was day or night. There was nothing to do—no TV, no radio, no books. Only the meals broke the monotony.

I had been told by prisoners in Pitchess that if you’re not strong-willed, then solitary confinement could absolutely break you. There were times when I wondered if I would keep my sanity.
‘Jesus Is Going to Use You’

After about a year at New Folsom, I heard the guards come by my cell with an announcement: “Protestant service. Any inmate wanting to go, stand by your gate.”

I had heard the same announcement for Catholics. Religion wasn’t something I was interested in. I knew next to nothing about Jesus, only that he was the one on all those crucifixes.

One time I was lying on my bed, listening to the voices outside. I heard an older woman say, “Is there someone in that cell?” She sounded Southern and spoke with a syrupy drawl. “Yes, ma’am,” the guard said, “but you don’t want to deal with Diaz. You’re wasting your time.”

“Well,” she answered, “Jesus came for him, too.”

She approached the cell: “Young man, can I speak with you?” Looking through the open slot in my gate, I couldn’t see anything except for the guard’s boots and a pair of spindly legs.

“How are you doing?” she asked. “I couldn’t be better,” came my sarcastic reply. “Young man,” she said, “I’m going to pray for you. But there’s something else I want to tell you: Jesus is going to use you.”

By now, I was certain she was crazy. Couldn’t she see I was locked away in solitary confinement? “I don’t think that’s going to happen,” I said. But she persisted: “Young man, every time I’m here, I’m going to come by and remind you that Jesus is going to use you.”

A year or so later, I was lying down in my cell, daydreaming, when I turned toward the wall opposite my bed. On that wall, something strange was happening. A movie was playing, a movie about my life. I saw myself as a young child, walking the old neighborhood at 9th and Kenmore. I witnessed incidents from my early days with the gang—everything in picture-perfect detail.

Then I saw a bearded man with long hair carrying a cross. As he trudged along, a mob of angry people shouted at him. When he arrived on top of a knoll, rough-looking men nailed his hands and feet to the wooden beams and raised the cross so it stood between two other men on crosses.

What got to me most was when this man looked at me and said, “Darwin, I’m doing this for you.” I shuddered. Apart from the guards and my family, no one knew my real name. Everyone called me Casey—my nickname for as long as I could remember.

Then I heard the sound of breath leaving him. At that moment, I knew he had died.

That’s when I hit the floor in the middle of the cell. I started weeping because I knew, somehow, that this was Almighty God, even though I didn’t understand what he had done for me. After hitting the floor, I knew I had to get on my knees. I started confessing my sins: God, I’m sorry for stabbing so many people. God, I’m sorry I robbed so many families.

With each new confession, I felt another weight come off my shoulders. When I finished, I knew something major had happened.

I asked to see a chaplain, who opened his Bible and explained who Jesus was and told me that what I experienced in that cell was salvation. He handed me a Bible and urged me to start reading.

I’d spend five or six hours reading that Bible, then fall asleep, wake up, and do some push-ups and calisthenics before picking up where I had left off. I didn’t understand half of what I was reading, but that didn’t bother me.

That was the start of my journey of faith. Eventually, I was released from solitary confinement and returned to the mainline prison population, where I was beaten for being a Christian and turning my back on my fellow gang members. But I was okay with that, because I was no longer a shot caller. I had found a new calling: telling other inmates about Jesus.

Casey Diaz is the author of The Shot Caller: A Latino Gangbanger’s Miraculous Escape from a Life of Violence to a New Life in Christ (Thomas Nelson). He lives in Los Angeles, where he owns a sign-making business and serves as a part-time pastor.

Did this testimony resonate with you? Let us know here.
TwitterReply on Twitter
FacebookJoin the conversation on Facebook
Tags:
BibleConfessionConversionCrimeGangsJesusLatinos and HispanicsMurderPrisonsTestimoniesViolence
From Issue:
May 2019, Vol. 63, No. 4, Pg 80, "When Jesus Calls a Gang Leader by Name"
May
Support our work
Subscribe to CT and get one year free.
More from this Issue
Read This Issue
This article is from the May 2019 issue.

    New & Noteworthy Books
    New & Noteworthy BooksSubscriber Access Only
    Reply All
    Reply All
    Reply AllSubscriber Access Only
    Young Life at the Border
    Cover Story
    Young Life at the Border

May
Subscribe
Read These Next

    Trending
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Editor's Note
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Our publishing process was less than perfect.
    Mark Galli
    From the Magazine
    Young Life at the Border
    Cover Story
    Young Life at the Border
    How youth ministries are reaching teens torn between Mexico and the US.
    Bekah McNeel in El Paso
    Related
    Terrorists in Burkina Faso Execute Six at Pentecostal Church
    News
    Terrorists in Burkina Faso Execute Six at Pentecostal Church
    (UPDATED) Assemblies of God pastor preferred to “die for his faith rather than leave the village” he served for decades.
    Kate Shellnutt
    Editor's Pick
    Nominate a Book for the 2020 Christianity Today Book Awards
    News Release
    Nominate a Book for the 2020 Christianity Today Book Awards
    Instructions for publishers.

    328
    tweet
    link

expand

    email
    print

Christianity Today

    Christianity Today:
    Home
    |
    FAQ
    |
    Masthead
    |
    Donate
    |
    Site Map
    |
    Terms & Conditions
    |
    Privacy Policy
    |
    Contact Us
    |
    Subscriber Help
    |
    Advertise
    |
    En Español
    |International: 
    CT Korea
    |
    Global Christianity
    |
    Log In

Stay informed. Sign up for our Free newsletter.
Christianity Today

        Give Today
        Who We Are
        What We Do
        Stories
        How to Partner
        Careers
        Media Room
        Follow Us
        Privacy Policy & Cookies
        Terms of Use
        Advertise
        Help
        Contact Us
        My Account

Beautiful Orthodoxy
Christianity Today strengthens the church by richly communicating the breadth of the true, good, and beautiful gospel.
Learn more
© 2019 Christianity Today - a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Back to top
$$$

Christianity Today

    Who We Are
    What We Do
    Newsletters
    Give Now

https://bakerbookhouse.com/products/a-desperate-hope-9780764232107?utm_source=CT%20-%20W&utm_medium=enewsletter&utm_campaign=DesperateHope&utm_term=BHP&utm_content=728x90
Christianity Today
Log in|Shop

    Sections Our LatestThe Magazine Subscribe

Women

    ReportingOpinionAbout Us

Don't Miss

    Enter His Kitchen With Thanksgiving and His Pantry with Praise
    Kristen Deede Johnson
    CT Women: Our 15 Favorite Prayers
    Compiled by Morgan Lee
    The Three-Letter Word That Undergirds Gospel Living
    Jen Pollock Michel
    Why the Church Needs Single Parents, and Single Parents Need the Church
    Ruth Moon Mari
    Why ‘Being Christian Without the Church’ Fails the Good Friday Test
    Fleming Rutledge

Opinion | Family
Parents Need Villages, Not Just Public Policies
American families are floundering for support. The church is a great place to start.
Gracy Olmstead
Parents Need Villages, Not Just Public Policies
Image: KsanasK / Getty / Adapted by Rick Szuecs

I grew up in rural Idaho as part of a homeschool family with four kids. A lot of our neighbors had big families and most also had stay-at-home moms. In this atmosphere, getting married and having kids were frequent and encouraged practices. More generally, we had an integrated community where singles, kids, parents, and grandparents inhabited a shared world and together laid the foundation for neighborly and familial health. Our “little platoons”—the circles of community that Edmund Burke pointed to as the “first principle” of public life and civic strength—were strong.
Current Issue
May 2019
Subscribe
May
Read This Issue

    Young Life at the BorderMissions Experts Are Redefining ‘Unreached People Groups’Fitness Trackers, Dating Apps, and Other Ladders to NowhereSubscriber access only

Follow @CT_Women
Free Newsletters
Get the best from CT editors, delivered straight to your inbox! [Receive weekly updates from CT Women, Marriage & Family, and Beautiful Word newsletters.]
More Newsletters

This kind of community is increasingly rare. Over the past several decades, America’s birthrate has dropped to concerning levels, and marriage rates have continued to decline. Senator Elizabeth Warren has argued that some of these changes stem from the “two-income trap,” a concept Helen Andrews described succinctly in a New York Times op-ed last week: “When mothers started entering paid employment in large numbers in the 1970s, it led to a bidding war over middle-class amenities that left everyone paying more for the privilege of being no better off than before. The result is a two-tiered system that isn’t working for anybody.”

The cries for egalitarianism during this period led rise to a career-centric economic system that has made childrearing more expensive and stressful for everybody. As a result, the argument goes, we’re all getting hurt in one way or another, either by not having the children we want to have, not pursuing the work-life balance we would like, or not achieving the familial stability that might add value to our lives.

It would appear that the economy we’ve created is at fault for the nation’s baby bust and marriage rates. Because of this economic pressure, Andrews argues in her Times op-ed that we need a woman (or several women) like Phyllis Schlafly to lead a fight for the American family and to advocate for pro-family policies like paid family leave.

However, economist Lyman Stone has suggested that the familial struggles of our time are not just related to monetary hardship. Throughout our nation’s history, people with tenuous financial situations still chose to get married and have a lot of babies. So money doesn’t explain everything. Instead, Stone writes, our culture—and its underlying ideals—most determines people’s childbearing decisions. “Put simply,” he writes, “there is robust empirical evidence that people ‘learn’ fertility ideals from their parents and immediate communities.”

In more traditional societies in the past, childrearing was seen as a “collective project,” one that the entire community helped with. “Even in the United States today, many communities that maintain strong family social norms have this kind of ‘modern village’ parenting style, whether it’s immigrant communities in big cities or Mormons out west,” Stone wrote for the Institute for Family Studies last year. “Unsurprisingly, these groups tend to have higher fertility, perhaps in part because parents, and especially women, have more volunteer help on hand to assist them.”

For the rest of us, what happened to the village model?

In our time, Stone notes, the fabric of community that once supported families and more traditional “fertility ideals” has suffered serious blows. A lot of Americans live farther from family members than they used to. Church attendance is down. Intergenerational community is much less common. According to Tim Carney’s book Alienated America (and Robert Putnam’s classic Bowling Alone), our free associations are fractured, and that fracturing has resulted in increased loneliness and despair in communities across the country. “[F]or most Americans today,” Stone writes, “we have ‘absentee villages’”:

    Young and old people are probably more culturally different today than at almost any time in American history. Fewer and fewer people participate in multigenerational intentional communities like churches. ... Indeed, as childcare becomes more and more atomized, we have seen the time parents spend parenting rapidly increase, fertility decline, and childcare costs explode.

This decline in community doesn’t just hurt two-parent families. I would argue that it hurts single parents even more, and as we see single-parent households on the rise, the decline of multigenerational intentional communities will have a huge impact on their wellbeing.

But this communal component also matters a good deal for the women Helen Andrews describes in her column, the ones who want more children—or more time at home—but find these desires beyond reach.

Stone’s research suggests that, in our time, fewer childless people are helping parents: The supply of volunteer-babysitters is waning, even as childcare becomes increasingly expensive. People are less likely to help the parents around them—either because they’re too busy, too isolated, or too shy to step in and offer assistance. In this context, paying for certain home supports, like childcare or meals, becomes increasingly necessary. And with the growth of those costs, our ability to opt out of the two-income system becomes an increasingly privileged and rare thing. In other words: Parenting without strong and involved villages is more expensive, lonely, and alienating.

These days, many young moms without supportive nearby families, neighbors, church members, or mentors are turning to Facebook groups in an effort to find “villagey” help and encouragement. A friend of mine said she frequently sees young moms posting in the wee hours of the morning, desperate for help as their babies scream or asking for advice as their two-year-olds struggle with behavioral problems. Through social media, we’re attempting to co-opt the little platoons of the past, but in many ways, these platforms fall short.

For one, they are often imperfect replacements for physical presence: the comfort of a warm cup of tea, a supportive smile, an encouraging hug. For another, they cannot meet tangible needs with tangible help—a neighbor who might come over and hold the screaming baby, or a teenager who might watch the needy toddler while mom gets a break.

Part of the solution to this problem lies in public policy, yes. But the other great need, in my opinion, is for us to reestablish robust local villages. While it might seem inadequate to talk about simple, neighborly solutions in the context of a very complex conversation—one that touches on everything from urban layout to workplace flexibility—these actions are key to social stability. And the church is a great starting point.

The local church is a natural place where older parents can connect with younger parents and where the community as a whole can come together to serve families through the generous giving of time and money. While many churches already have ministries to families in their midst—some coordinate meals for those who’ve welcomed a new baby, others have mentoring programs for women who need it—there are additional ways of strengthening the bonds between a church’s associative strength and parents across the socioeconomic spectrum who feel lonely. That might involve providing free or highly discounted daycare to local single parents in need or offering free dinners or babysitting nights on a regular basis.

I’ve also wondered if the church—that’s all of us—could go even deeper by helping to bring back some of the old, bygone social habits that traditionally fostered community. For instance, here in the US and in other countries, people historically practiced the habit of “paying calls,” where at specific times of day people could drop in and visit each other unannounced. Paying calls was not just expected but welcomed, and it served as the foundation of healthy communal life.

However, the whole idea of paying calls was historically tied to a “home economy” that no longer exists. In our society, many families are away from home most of the day—at work or school, at the grocery store or an extracurricular event. As our lives have increasingly become distant from the homes and neighborhoods in which we live, the home has no longer become a place with potential for weeklong openness or hospitality.

The church has the social infrastructure to change that. Many congregations already organize “small groups” that meet on weekdays or weekends, usually in the evening. How hard would it be to encourage at-home parents to have one or more afternoons or evenings a week when their doors are open and fellow church members (as well as neighbors) are invited to drop in for conversation or a play date? Although they might seem insignificant, these types of habituated actions provide the feasting and fellowship that affirm and encourage us and also create the building blocks for a healthy society.

Growing up, my own mother modeled village living on a weekly and sometimes daily basis. A neighbor would often stop by with her multitude of children, and when she did, my mother would welcome her inside, offer tea, send her kids upstairs for toys (and also free childcare—me), and then offer much-needed counsel or encouragement.

Those women weren’t the only ones who benefited from my mother’s hospitality. Each time I watched her practice it, I learned important lessons about neighborliness and love. Several of the kids who came and went through our doors have told me as adults how much it meant to them, too. Each year, I realize anew how important my mom’s open door was—how it fostered Christian hospitality and strong social capital and thus led to the strengthening of young families. These memories from childhood also made me want to be a stay-at-home mom—because they provided me with a vision that was nourishing and good.

Ultimately, supporting families through good political policy is incredibly important, whether through financial policy supports or through generous family leave. But there’s no replacement for the village and its neighborliness or the church and its hospitality. If we’re going to encourage familial health in the future, the local congregation might be the best place to start.

Gracy Olmstead is a journalist and mother based in northern Virginia. She has written for The American Conservative, The Week, Washington Post, and The New York Times. Follow her on Twitter @GracyOlmstead.
https://bakerbookhouse.com/products/a-desperate-hope-9780764232107?utm_source=CT%20-%20W&utm_medium=enewsletter&utm_campaign=DesperateHope&utm_term=BHP&utm_content=320x50
Twitter Reply on Twitter
Facebook Join the conversation on Facebook
Tags:
FamilyFellowship and CommunityMotherhoodParentingPolitics
Posted:May 9, 2019
May
Support our work
Subscribe to CT and get one year free.
Read These Next

    Related
    There's No Such Thing as a 'Boy Color' or 'Girl Color'
    Reporting
    There's No Such Thing as a 'Boy Color' or 'Girl Color'Subscriber access only
    The short history of our blue-pink designations.
    Anna Broadway
    Trending
    CT Women: Our 15 Favorite Prayers
    Opinion | Discipleship
    CT Women: Our 15 Favorite Prayers
    Women from across the country share words that shape their prayer lives.
    Compiled by Morgan Lee
    From the Magazine
    Young Life at the Border
    Cover Story | CT Magazine
    Young Life at the Border
    How youth ministries are reaching teens torn between Mexico and the US.
    Bekah McNeel in El Paso
    Editor's Pick
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    Testimony | CT Magazine
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    How a gang leader found salvation in prison.
    Casey Diaz

    68
    tweet
    link

expand

    email
    print

Christianity Today

    CT Women:
    Home
    |
    About Us
    |
    Contact Us
    |
    Reprint Policy
    |
    Site Map
    |
    Free Newsletters
    |
    Subscribe
    |
    Archives
    |
    Log In

Stay informed. Sign up for our Free newsletter.
Christianity Today

        Give Today
        Who We Are
        What We Do
        Stories
        How to Partner
        Careers
        Media Room
        Follow Us
        Privacy Policy & Cookies
        Terms of Use
        Advertise
        Help
        Contact Us
        My Account

Beautiful Orthodoxy
Christianity Today strengthens the church by richly communicating the breadth of the true, good, and beautiful gospel.
Learn more
© 2019 Christianity Today - a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Back to top
$$$
Christianity Today

    Who We Are
    What We Do
    Newsletters
    Give Now

Christianity Today
Log in|Shop

    Sections Our LatestThe Magazine Subscribe

Trending

    News
    Died: Warren Wiersbe, Preachers’ Favorite Bible Commentator
    Caleb Lindgren
    News
    Terrorists in Burkina Faso Execute Six at Pentecostal Church
    Kate Shellnutt
    Jean Vanier Made Us All More Human
    Bethany McKinney Fox
    How the Bible Project Is Using Video to Get People into Scripture Again
    Paul J. Pastor
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Mark Galli

Theology
Who Needs to Hear Proverbs 31 the Most?
The ‘wife of noble character’ is rarely applied to whom it was meant to describe.
Chad Ashby| May 7, 2019
Who Needs to Hear Proverbs 31 the Most?
Image: Illustration by Rick Szuecs / Source images: Unsplash

In recent years, many faithful Christian women have internalized the words of Proverbs 31, but I can’t help wondering with 17th-century Bible commentary author Matthew Henry, “This passage is to be applied to individuals, but may it not also be applied to the church of God, which is described as a virtuous spouse?” The answer historically—though not in modern interpretation—has been emphatically yes. Paul connects the dots when he writes about marriage, “This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church” (Eph. 5:32). If this is the profound mystery of the universe, we must rediscover the most foundational reading of Proverbs 31: Mother Wisdom’s poetic instruction to the Messianic King about his Valiant Bride.
Current Issue
May 2019
Subscribe
May
Read This Issue

    Young Life at the BorderMissions Experts Are Redefining ‘Unreached People Groups’Fitness Trackers, Dating Apps, and Other Ladders to NowhereSubscriber access only

Follow @ctmagazine
Free Newsletters
Get the best from CT editors, delivered straight to your inbox! [Stay informed with updates from CT Direct, CT Weekly, CT Women, Books & Culture and Gallireport newsletters]
More Newsletters

Church, when was last time you looked into the mirror of Scripture? Do you see the beauty the King sees in you—his excellent wife? And local churches, how would our ministries shift if we began to recapture a vision of God’s people as the strong woman of Proverbs 31? It is the delight of our King in his church that ensures the gates of hell shall not prevail against us. Bishop Caesarius of Arles (c. 470–542) insists: “That valiant woman is the Church. How can she fail to be valiant, since from the beginning of the world she is troubled by such great tribulations and still is not overcome?”
Behold her beauty

The final 22 verses of Proverbs form an acrostic poem that was handed down to King Lemuel by his mother. Each line begins with a successive letter of the Hebrew alphabet. The woman it portrays is beautiful from A to Z; her excellence exhausts human language. German medieval philosopher and theologian Albertus Magnus (c. 1193–1280) recognized how each poetic line expounds the meaning of each letter. For example, the opening question “A wife of noble character who can find?” begins with the letter alef, which means “thousand.” He explains this is the biblical equivalent of ascribing to her three perfect tens. Her excellence is breathtaking.

Ancient readers traced this Woman’s inestimable value back to the One who pursued her to the ends of the earth. Caesarius explains, “‘Who shall find a worthy wife?’ This means, who else except Christ? Indeed, He did not find her valiant, but made her so by finding her.” Just as a famous painting’s worth is determined by what a collector is willing to pay, the church’s value is bestowed by her Beholder: “She is worth far more than rubies” (31:10). Baptist theologian John Gill marvels, “She is bought with a price, but not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ; the ransom price paid for her is himself.”

If you are like me, when you think of your local church you may instinctively picture an organization, a congregation, a building, or a set of programs. What if we began to see the church through the eyes of her Bridegroom? In churches where we value efficiency, professionalism, responsibility, and even biblical fidelity, is there a place for beauty? And what does beautiful ministry even look like?

If we follow the gaze of the King, his eyes delight in this: “She is clothed with strength and dignity” (31:25). Confident in her gifts and certain of her success, “She sets about her work vigorously; her arms are strong for her tasks. ... In her hand she holds the distaff and grasps the spindle with her fingers” (31:17, 19). Saint Augustine illumines this image: “Hey ho! I’m not ashamed to teach you the holy art of spinning wool. Look, if anyone has a full purse, a full barn, a full storeroom, all that is on the distaff; get it wound onto the spindle.”

Christ takes pleasure in the church who spins earthly means into heavenly treasures. With hands adorned by spiritual bracelets, the church radiates a beauty beyond that of Rebekah (Gen. 24:16, 22). Her members move with elegant, steeled conviction glittering with the gifts won for her at the cross (Eph. 4:8).

Embrace her motherly care

This valiant woman is a wonder to behold, but we cannot miss the primary role she fulfills in all her tireless endeavors: mother. The poem describes her constant maternal care: “She gets up while it is still night; she provides food for her family and portions for her female servants. ... When it snows, she has no fear for her household; for all of them are clothed in scarlet” (31:15, 21).

In her house, no son goes hungry, no daughter catches cold. Surely the church cares for the physical needs of her children, but Augustine sees something deeper: “They are clothed, and extremely well. Do you want to know how well? All you who have been baptized in Christ have put on Christ (Gal. 3:27).” With motherly comfort, she covers the ashamed and guilty with the scarlet robe of Christ’s righteousness.

However, her care extends far beyond her own family. Blessed are the destitute who find their way to her doorstep: “She opens her arms to the poor and extends her hands to the needy” (31:20). What if our churches began to see themselves as the neighborhood mom—whose open arms are always ready to embrace a lost boy or to serve lunch to a homeless beggar? What if church members worked in such unity of purpose that their coordinated efforts to care for the poor were like skilled palms extended with gentleness to the needy? What your local church came to be known as the godly Mother to refugees, college students, and the abused in your community?

Those wandering in a dark world should find the porch-light always on, so to speak, at the church: “Her lamp does not go out at night” (31:18). The church warms the despondent with her motherly glow: the eternal lamp symbolizes hope. It is a tearful child’s mother who alone is able to lay his head on her shoulder, tussle his hair, and gently help him see past the present sorrow to a brighter future.

Motherly affection, like the beam of a lantern, casts rays of hope ahead for her sons and daughters. The church reminds us that despite this present darkness filled with injustice, sin, loss, and despair, one day our Bridegroom will come like a thief in the night. Augustine encourages: “So let her be described, then, let her be praised, let her be commended, to be loved by all of us as our mother.”

Share her single-hearted devotion

As King Lemuel’s mother details her tableau, she takes extra care with her brush around the eyes. The virtuous woman’s gaze is transfixed upon one man: “Her husband has full confidence in her and lacks nothing of value. She brings him good, not harm, all the days of her life” (31:11–12).

Albertus points out that this line begins with the Hebrew letter beth, which means “house”: “And thus the Strong Woman is said to be one in whom her husband is confident, both because of her chaste love that loves only him ... and again because she is, as it were, the dwelling place of her husband’s heart.” Captivated by his love, she ever lives to please her husband. Augustine explains, “It’s him she serves, him she is devoted to, him she loves, him she is always thinking how to please. She doesn’t deck herself out either for her own eyes or for the eyes of others.”

The church ought to be characterized by this single-hearted devotion to her Bridegroom. After all, John Gill reiterates, she is “a woman actually married to Christ ... a woman beautiful, especially in his eyes, with whom she is the fairest among women; a woman, the weaker vessel, unable to do anything without him, yet everything through him: a ‘virtuous’ one, inviolably chaste in her love and affection to Christ, her husband.”
ChurchSalary

In our devotion to his teachings, the church trusts the Word of her Husband. In our desire to obey his commands, we seek only to draw Christ’s affectionate approval. In our total reliance upon him for strength, we show that all our works are by his grace.

Thousands of others vie for our affections—politicians, cultural icons, and personalities. Will our churches exude a whole-hearted, singular devotion to Christ? The virtuous woman of Proverbs 31 finds such success in all her endeavors because her eyes are focused on her confident husband. May we find no greater joy than to hear, “[Our] husband is respected at the city gate, where he takes his seat among the elders of the land” (31:23).

Relish the king’s delight

The prophet Zephaniah promised a day would come when “The Lord your God ... will rejoice over you with gladness; he will quiet you by his love; he will exult over you with loud singing” (Zep. 3:17, ESV). We get a foretaste of that moment as Proverbs 31 crescendos in musical refrain: “Her children arise and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praises her: ‘Many women do noble things, but you surpass them all’” (31:29). How would our churches change if we no longer prized charming facilities and superficially attractive ministries but instead basked in the pleasure of our King whose delight is in “a woman who fears the Lord”?

One day in the New Heavens and Earth, the Groom will return for his Bride. As she descends in radiant white, he will demand of the entire universe: “Honor her for all that her hands have done, and let her works bring her praise at the city gate!” (31:31). In the meantime, brothers and sisters, let our hands be busy with the deeds of this virtuous lady.

Contemporary scholar Bruce Waltke writes, “This valiant wife has been canonized as a role model for all Israel for all time” (emphasis original). “Wise daughters aspire to be like her, wise men seek to marry her, and all wise people aim to incarnate the wisdom she embodies, each in his own sphere of activity.” The Proverbs 31 woman is who we are and who we must be. Church, let us take these words to heart!

Chad Ashby is the pastor of College Street Baptist Church in Newberry, South Carolina. He blogs at After Math.
TwitterReply on Twitter
FacebookJoin the conversation on Facebook
Tags:
BibleChurchTheology
Posted:
May 7, 2019
May
Support our work
Subscribe to CT and get one year free.
Read These Next

    Trending
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Editor's Note
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Our publishing process was less than perfect.
    Mark Galli
    From the Magazine
    Young Life at the Border
    Cover Story
    Young Life at the Border
    How youth ministries are reaching teens torn between Mexico and the US.
    Bekah McNeel in El Paso
    Related
    Died: Warren Wiersbe, Preachers’ Favorite Bible Commentator
    Obituary
    Died: Warren Wiersbe, Preachers’ Favorite Bible Commentator
    The prolific author and pastor taught Christians how to “Be” in the Word.
    Caleb Lindgren
    Editor's Pick
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    Testimony
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    How a gang leader found salvation in prison.
    Casey Diaz

    303
    tweet
    link

expand

    email
    print

    Sections 

Christianity Today Who Needs to Hear Proverbs 31 the Most?

    Search share 156

Christianity Today

    Christianity Today:
    Home
    |
    FAQ
    |
    Masthead
    |
    Donate
    |
    Site Map
    |
    Terms & Conditions
    |
    Privacy Policy
    |
    Contact Us
    |
    Subscriber Help
    |
    Advertise
    |
    En Español
    |International: 
    CT Korea
    |
    Global Christianity
    |
    Log In

Stay informed. Sign up for our Free newsletter.
Christianity Today

        Give Today
        Who We Are
        What We Do
        Stories
        How to Partner
        Careers
        Media Room
        Follow Us
        Privacy Policy & Cookies
        Terms of Use
        Advertise
        Help
        Contact Us
        My Account

Beautiful Orthodoxy
Christianity Today strengthens the church by richly communicating the breadth of the true, good, and beautiful gospel.
Learn more
© 2019 Christianity Today - a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Back to top
$$$

Christianity Today

    Who We Are
    What We Do
    Newsletters
    Give Now

https://grow.pushpay.com/lp-ebook-toxic-leadership-vendor.html?utm_medium=display-paid&utm_source=christianity-today&utm_content=content-ebook&utm_campaign=toxic-leadership&utm_term=faith--all--all--vendor--pastors--728x90
Christianity Today
Log in|Shop

    Sections Our LatestThe Magazine Subscribe

Trending

    News
    Died: Warren Wiersbe, Preachers’ Favorite Bible Commentator
    Caleb Lindgren
    News
    Terrorists in Burkina Faso Execute Six at Pentecostal Church
    Kate Shellnutt
    Jean Vanier Made Us All More Human
    Bethany McKinney Fox
    How the Bible Project Is Using Video to Get People into Scripture Again
    Paul J. Pastor
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Mark Galli

Cover Story
Young Life at the Border
How youth ministries are reaching teens torn between Mexico and the US.
Bekah McNeel in El Paso| April 22, 2019
Young Life at the Border
Image: Caleb Bryan

Jocelyn Duran’s mother crossed the US-Mexico border 17 years ago to give birth to her in a hospital in El Paso, Texas, making the baby girl the only American citizen in her family. When she was three years old, Duran moved from her mother’s home in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, to live with her grandmother in El Paso and begin attending school there.

An American education promised opportunity, an opportunity unlike any her family members had known and one she was expected to make good on. Together, she and her grandmother would turn nothing into something. “You start with zero,” Duran says. “Except this big dream.”

Her grandmother, who is undocumented, worked as domestic help. For a time they lived in whatever home the woman was tending. They struggled financially. Over the years, Duran felt torn between the life she was building in El Paso and the family she could almost see just across the trickling Rio Grande. She watched her grandmother, who felt abandoned, drift into hopelessness and eventually abandon her Protestant faith.

Once they were in an apartment of their own, Duran found her way to a church down the street and began developing what she characterizes as a “real relationship with Jesus.” It developed further when she was a student at Bowie High School, where she got involved in her church’s youth ministry. “If you don’t have Jesus, you’re just out here all alone,” she says.

The high school sits less than half a mile from the Cordova Bridge, one of four bridges connecting El Paso and Juárez. In Duran’s junior year, when her family felt she was old enough to walk over the bridge by herself, she decided to move back to Mexico to be with her mother, becoming one of hundreds of students who commute from homes in Juárez to schools in El Paso.

Now 17, Duran gets dropped off each morning at the bridge to stand in line and cross into America. The queue often stretches more than 100 people long, many of them students chatting outside in small groups or, typical for Duran, standing alone with earbuds in. They welcome the morning sun during the chilly desert winter but sweat beneath it in warmer months. Once inside the US Customs office, students separate into a special line just for them.

On foot, the journey from the Mexican side of the bridge to the front door of Bowie takes about an hour—relatively quick compared to the two hours it can take on rainy days when Duran catches a ride with a friend at 6 a.m. and crosses the bridge by car. Delays occasionally make her late to school, but not often. Students file through customs and walk across Chamizal National Memorial Park to Bowie, which is visible from the checkpoint.
https://thecrg.org/?utm_source=CT&utm_medium=Banner&utm_campaign=CTMay&utm_content=blue
Free Newsletters
Get the best from CT editors, delivered straight to your inbox! [Stay informed with updates from CT Direct, CT Weekly, CT Women, Books & Culture and Gallireport newsletters]
More Newsletters

At 3:57 each afternoon—Duran is precise about this time—she leaves school and does the crossing in reverse, catching a bus home on the Juárez side of the bridge. When she has tennis practice or swim team, she’s fortunate enough to miss rush hour and her mom picks her up on the other side.

Duran never notified the El Paso Independent School District about her change of residence when she moved in with her mother in Juárez; she’s still registered under her grandmother’s El Paso address. Technically, that is fraud. According to a district representative, any student who admits to living in Mexico “would put himself at risk, since by law we can only provide services to students who reside in El Paso County.” Even for US citizens, lying about residency for the purpose of attending a school district other than your own is grounds for nullifying credits or for expulsion; in some states it’s punishable with hefty fines and jail time.

But the practice has been common for decades in border cities like El Paso, and for the most part, school districts look the other way. (School funding in Texas is attendance-based, so binational commuters in fact bring districts additional state revenues.) Students residing in Mexico use relatives’ addresses to enroll in American schools. Families rent cheap apartments for the mailbox. One Young Life staffer remembers students banding together to pay for an apartment and putting different utilities in each of their names to prove residency.
Immigrant youth commonly feel stuck between two worlds - and as if they might be rejected by either of them at any moment.
Image: Caleb Bryan

Immigrant youth commonly feel stuck between two worlds - and as if they might be rejected by either of them at any moment.

School districts along the border have occasionally tried to crack down on such commuting, even posting photographers at points of entry to identify Mexican students. But Duran and binational students like her often feel they have little choice but to make such moral compromises, goaded forward by the decisions of their parents and by family expectations they may not even be aware of until adolescence. Like any teen, they are awkwardly searching for their place in the world only to realize a wall runs through theirs.

“Sometimes my conscience is like ‘aaahhh!!!!’” Duran says, making explosion gestures around her head. She describes filling out her FAFSA, the federal application for student aid and a standard part of the college application process, wrestling with right and wrong when asked for an address or information about her family’s income.

“It feels like I’m lying,” she says. “But it’s something I have to do if I want the best outcome for my life.”

Whether they have citizenship, temporary status, or no documents at all, immigrant youth commonly feel stuck between two worlds—and as if they might be rejected by either of them at any moment. That tension is especially acute for many teens raised along the southwest border, whose proximity to it makes it that much harder to navigate the societal and logistical difficulties that national boundaries create. For teens like Duran, church youth groups and national networks like Young Life offer a home that transcends the border—a rare place to feel like they belong and sort out what it means to live for Christ in a culture of “the middle.”

“[We tell them] their hope is not in America,” says Young Life leader Bridget Chacón, who focuses on college students in El Paso. “Their hope is in Jesus.”

Last fall, the 33-year-old Chacón stood at a recruiting table in the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) student center. Young Life’s highly relational discipleship mission was a natural fit with her outgoing, charismatic personality. Connecting came easily. But the bridge crossers had been a hard group to crack. When she tried to reach out, the students declined invites to events or coffee and rarely explained why. Sometimes they walked campus alone; sometimes they moved in small groups, closed circuits of shared experiences.

Most international commuters at UTEP have student visas or are US citizens living in Juárez, but “if they don’t trust you, they won’t tell you they commute every day,” Chacón says.

That particular day at the Young Life table, however, a new student leader had joined Chacón at the table and she noticed something changing. Andrea Carolina “Caro” Perez Lopez, 24, was chatting with the commuters not only in Spanish, which Chacón could have done, but in the colloquialisms and slang of Juárez. Perez Lopez told the students that she too crossed the border every day on a student visa.
The morning commute for students crossing the US-Mexico border in El Paso can take an hour onfootorupto two hours by car.
Image: Caleb Bryan

The morning commute for students crossing the US-Mexico border in El Paso can take an hour onfootorupto two hours by car.

When she began commuting to El Paso for college, Perez Lopez was surprised how isolated she felt. She had the one or two friends she crossed the bridge with every day, but once she got to campus she missed the big social network she’d left behind in Juárez. She was struck by the cultural divide between the Mexican Americans and the Mexicans. Which route you take to school each morning may seem trivial to outsiders, but it was consequential and disruptive to her.
https://grow.pushpay.com/lp-ebook-toxic-leadership-vendor.html?utm_medium=display-paid&utm_source=christianity-today&utm_content=content-ebook&utm_campaign=toxic-leadership&utm_term=faith--all--all--vendor--pastors--300x250

“I felt very alone,” Perez Lopez says. “I needed to find my people.”

Chacón invited her to a pancake dinner, and soon Perez Lopez was hooked on Young Life. Others in the ministry helped her dig into some of the complicated parts of her life, including the pressure that comes along with going to school in the US, the pressure to prove that it was worth whatever sacrifices she and her family made. “I needed to figure myself out in multiple layers,” she says.

Perez Lopez came for the connection but soon found she loved Bible study too. While she grew up Catholic and still considers herself so, she’d never gotten to know the Bible like she did through Young Life, where she found herself “pulling up layers and layers of what Scripture offers.”

With Perez Lopez as their point of contact, more Mexican and binational UTEP students began coming to Young Life events. The ministry to students living in Juárez has grown to the point that Chacón is laying the groundwork to establish a Young Life club there.

Colorado Springs–based Young Life is best known for its work with high school students. But the $400 million ministry enrolls more than 300,000 youth a week in regular club meetings around the world, from middle schools to military bases.

Kim Prieto believes Young Life is, in many ways, the perfect ministry to students whose lives straddle the border. “We’re so used to dealing with messy lives,” says the 62-year-old, who recently retired after working for nine years with Young Life in El Paso and still keeps in touch with many of the high school students she mentored. For her, the complexities of border life pale in comparison to helping teens get out of troubles the border can exacerbate, such as dangerous living situations or sexual abuse. “We never really asked them much about their [immigration] situation unless something came up,” Prieto says.

A few years prior, a teen who had been living in El Paso under the assumption that she was a US citizen asked her parents if she could go to Young Life camp. That’s when her parents told her that she was undocumented and she could not travel. Not only could she not go to camp, she confided in Prieto, but all of her future plans suddenly felt uncertain. “We just walked with her in it,” Prieto says.

One of the most important jobs of Young Life staff on the border, Prieto says, is to build safe and stable relationships with students and offer spaces where they can work through their fears and uncertainties with others. El Paso is ground zero for the national immigration debate—President Trump launched his 2020 campaign there, as did Democratic challenger Beto O’Rourke—and the heat of the spotlight has heightened anxiety in students’ households. “People weren’t coming out of their homes,” says Prieto, who points out that illegal immigration is far less of a conversation in El Paso than it is in other parts of the country. “God is not a God of fear,” she emphasizes with students. “We go boldly with God.”

Holly Smith, 43, teaches high school more than 600 miles southeast in McAllen, Texas, just across the border from Reynosa, Mexico. As the faculty sponsor for Young Lives, a Young Life ministry to teen moms, she says she reminds students, “God has a plan for your life whether you are documented or not.”

Smith has students whose immigration status has trapped them in abusive situations or who were left effectively homeless after their families were deported. She’s opened her home to students who needed temporary places to live and has found others to do the same. Through years of this kind of work, Smith says she’s seen students come to faith in Christ. “I’m going to love these kids and I’m going to take care of them no matter what.”

Smith works with Young Life Rio Grande Valley director Joe Wilson, 37, who says he looks at immigration as one of many sanctification issues in a young person’s life. He helps them sort through their legal options if their status is tenuous, and watches them grapple with lies they feel they have to tell to stay safe or to navigate the seemingly competing expectations of family, peers, and the law. For instance, which commandment takes precedence: honoring your father and mother (and remaining in a US school with a dodgy address), or not bearing false witness?

Christian ethicists have long debated when, if ever, lying might be permissible. Exceptions to the Bible’s general prohibition against deception include Rahab, who lied to protect Israelites from harm and is nonetheless lauded for her act in the Book of Hebrews’ “hall of faith.” And Dietrich Bonhoeffer hit closer to home when he argued, hypothetically, that if a teacher asked a student about her father’s drinking in front of the class, the student could righteously lie because publicly outing her father as a drunk would violate the biblical mandate to honor him.

As Wilson sees it, teens at the border are walking toward righteousness like any other teen; they just may have additional obstacles in their path. “It’s going to take a long time to get there because of the systems that have been set up around [them],” he says. What for one person may be a matter of integrity—such as choosing to live on one side of the border or another—may, for another, be a matter of safety or obedience. Wilson has counseled teens who have good options in Mexico to consider moving back. But if doing so would compromise their safety, he does not encourage it. “The broken political system probably doesn’t supersede the sanctity of life.”

Young Life staff often find themselves in the middle of the brokenness. Annie Mays, the ministry’s area director for San Antonio, tells of a phone call she got recently from a panicked student leader. He’d been in a car accident, riding shotgun with a friend who was, he admitted, driving recklessly. No one was hurt, but the police were on their way.

Mays, 34, knew why he was panicked and calling her rather than a family member. The student was in the country illegally. Mays rushed to the scene of the accident to beat the police there. She wanted to be the first person the officer encountered.

“I had this very gut reaction that maybe my whiteness, or my old-ladiness, or the fact that I was driving up in a minivan” would validate the student in the eyes of the police, she says. There was no reason to detain her student, who was not driving. But she knew that things could quickly go sideways. “These kids don’t have room to make mistakes.”

Young Life leaders across the country and the globe are used to dealing with risky teenage behavior. In that regard, communities along the border are no different. “Every teenager I’ve ever walked with is navigating the fallout of this broken world,” Mays says. If one is undocumented, “will we ignore them because their mess is more intimidating to step into?”

That doesn’t mean Prieto, Chacón, and their counterparts in McAllen and Brownsville, another Texas border town, haven’t had to adapt to the unique needs of immigrant and binational students. Ministry staff help students navigate the immigration system in pursuit of legal status when necessary. Some have obtained their citizenship after a Young Life leader connected them to an immigration lawyer.
In her role with Young Life, Bridget Chacón connects with students on the campus of University of Texas at El Paso.
Image: Caleb Bryan

In her role with Young Life, Bridget Chacón connects with students on the campus of University of Texas at El Paso.

America’s labyrinthine immigration system can even complicate putting on a local event. Students transitioning from a parent’s work visa to a student visa—a routine and legal procedure—may balk at signing a waiver or registering for an activity for fear they may be crossing an invisible line that will jeopardize their application.“It creates a lot of extra work,” Chacón says. “But if these are obstacles that are keeping these kids from meeting a loving and everlasting God, are you willing to meet them where they are at?”

For Chacón and other Young Life leaders, part of meeting students on their level means discipling them to come to their own conclusions about what is right in their particular situations. They ask questions like, Do you feel the Holy Spirit is telling you that is wrong? and Are you lying because you are afraid? If you were not afraid, would you still feel the need to lie?

“When conviction comes into play, we go to Scripture,” Chacón says. A lot of times, she admits, students try to avoid the big moral questions until they are out of the ambiguous places—until they’ve graduated, gotten legal status, or gotten caught.

The narrative of the American Dream is strong. “It’s worth it to most people,” she says, to aim for the dream—even if it means risking deportation or expulsion or if it means adding considerable stress to their lives. The promise has been part of their imagination since childhood, and Young Life leaders know that for many immigrant families it easily becomes a form of idolatry.

In the end, however, Young Life always comes back to what the kids have in common: Even if they don’t need a lawyer, they still need Jesus, and they still need a friend.

For her part, UTEP student leader Perez Lopez says she’s found her place on the US side of the border over time. As much as city pairs like El Paso and Juárez function symbiotically, the border is still very real. It divides people culturally, economically, and legally. For students whose lives move back and forth over that divide, they need a God who will meet them there, in the middle. He does so, Perez Lopez explains, through his people. With Young Life, “You know whatever side of the border you’re on, you have your people.”

Bekah McNeel is immigrant communities editor for CT.

Have something to add about this? See something we missed? Share your feedback here.
TwitterReply on Twitter
FacebookJoin the conversation on Facebook
Tags:
ImmigrationMexicoTexasYouth Ministry
From Issue:
May 2019, Vol. 63, No. 4, Pg 36, "A Border Runs Through It"
May
Support our work
Subscribe to CT and get one year free.
More from this Issue
Read This Issue
This article is from the May 2019 issue.

    Gleanings: May 2019
    News
    Gleanings: May 2019Subscriber Access Only
    Lessons on Christian Rhetoric from Five of its Greatest Practitioners
    Interview
    Lessons on Christian Rhetoric from Five of its Greatest PractitionersSubscriber Access Only
    Reply All
    Reply All
    Reply AllSubscriber Access Only

May
Subscribe
Read These Next

    Trending
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Editor's Note
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Our publishing process was less than perfect.
    Mark Galli
    From the Magazine
    Worship God at All Times. If Necessary, Use Music.
    Biblical Theology
    Worship God at All Times. If Necessary, Use Music.Subscriber Access Only
    It turns out the Bible’s idea of worship is mostly about posture, not music or praise.
    Daniel I. Block
    Related
    Sabbath Rest: Not Just for Grownups
    Excerpt
    Sabbath Rest: Not Just for Grownups
    I want my children to know how to work hard. I also want them to know that hard work doesn’t define them.
    Nathan T. Stucky
    Editor's Pick
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    Testimony
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    How a gang leader found salvation in prison.
    Casey Diaz

    1125
    tweet
    link

expand

    email
    print

Christianity Today

    Christianity Today:
    Home
    |
    FAQ
    |
    Masthead
    |
    Donate
    |
    Site Map
    |
    Terms & Conditions
    |
    Privacy Policy
    |
    Contact Us
    |
    Subscriber Help
    |
    Advertise
    |
    En Español
    |International: 
    CT Korea
    |
    Global Christianity
    |
    Log In

Stay informed. Sign up for our Free newsletter.
Christianity Today

        Give Today
        Who We Are
        What We Do
        Stories
        How to Partner
        Careers
        Media Room
        Follow Us
        Privacy Policy & Cookies
        Terms of Use
        Advertise
        Help
        Contact Us
        My Account

Beautiful Orthodoxy
Christianity Today strengthens the church by richly communicating the breadth of the true, good, and beautiful gospel.
Learn more
© 2019 Christianity Today - a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Back to top
$$$
Christianity Today

    Who We Are
    What We Do
    Newsletters
    Give Now

https://grow.pushpay.com/lp-ebook-2018-8-strategic-hires-that-will-grow-your-church.html?utm_medium=display-paid&utm_source=christianity-today&utm_content=content-ebook&utm_campaign=ebook-strategic-hires&utm_term=faith--all--all--pastors--728x90
Christianity Today
Log in|Shop

    Sections Our LatestThe Magazine Subscribe

Trending

    News
    Died: Warren Wiersbe, Preachers’ Favorite Bible Commentator
    Caleb Lindgren
    News
    Terrorists in Burkina Faso Execute Six at Pentecostal Church
    Kate Shellnutt
    Jean Vanier Made Us All More Human
    Bethany McKinney Fox
    How the Bible Project Is Using Video to Get People into Scripture Again
    Paul J. Pastor
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Mark Galli

Views

| Spirited Life
Bringing a Tent Peg to a Sword Fight
Why God sends his people into battle armed with the tools of everyday life.
Andrew Wilson| April 22, 2019
Bringing a Tent Peg to a Sword Fight
Image: Illustration by Rick Szuecs / Source images: Envato

In the first Battle of Armageddon, the enemy commander was killed with camping equipment. Speculation about the next round has been the stuff of bestselling books and blockbuster movies, replete with speculation about a world government, flying locust-scorpion warships, bar codes, conspiracies, the EU, nuclear weapons, and a giant meteor steaming toward earth with Bruce Willis on board.

But the first time a war was fought at Har-Magedon (the hill of Megiddo), the decisive blow was struck with the most everyday objects imaginable. Sisera, commander of the mighty Canaanite armies, had his head crushed by Jael, a tent-dwelling woman wielding a mallet and a tent peg (Judges 4:17–22).

It’s a striking story in many ways. A woman, Deborah, is judging Israel, which is unusual in itself. The man charged with leading the Israelite army, Barak, refuses to fight unless she goes with him. Israel wins the battle despite overwhelming odds. When the victory is celebrated in song (Judges 5), the main characters are (again) three women: Deborah, described as “a mother in Israel,” the mallet-wielding Jael, and Sisera’s luridly vile mother. And the peg through the temple is pretty unforgettable.

Yet this story also forms part of a recurring pattern in Scripture, in which Israel defeats her enemies with tools instead of weapons. In this case, Israel has no shields or spears but conquers, instead, with a peg and a “workman’s hammer” (5:26). Another judge, Shamgar, defeats the Philistines with a cattle prod (3:31). Gideon wins with jars and trumpets (7:19–23). The Philistine king Abimelek is killed by a millstone being thrown over the wall (9:53), the second time in five chapters that an obscure ...
Subscriber access only You have reached the end of this Article Preview

To continue reading, subscribe now. Subscribers have full digital access.
Log inSubscribe

Already a CT subscriber? Log in for full digital access.
Spirited Life
Spirited Life is a collision between biblical reflection and charismatic practice, aiming to make people happier in God.
Andrew Wilson
Andrew Wilson is teaching pastor at King's Church London and author most recently of Spirit and Sacrament: An Invitation to Eucharismatic Worship (Zondervan). Follow him on Tiwtter @AJWTheology.
Previous Spirited Life Columns:

    You Shall Know Them by Their Clothes
    When God Makes Sunbeams Collide with Waterfall Spray
    Heard the One About the Jewish Man, the Roman Demon, and the Gentile Pigs?
    More . . .

TwitterReply on Twitter
FacebookJoin the conversation on Facebook
Tags:
GodIsraelJesusOld TestamentPeaceThe CrossWar
From Issue:
May 2019, Vol. 63, No. 4, Pg 28, "Bringing a Tent Peg to a Sword Fight"
May
Support our work
Subscribe to CT and get one year free.
More from this Issue
Read This Issue
This article is from the May 2019 issue.

    Young Life at the Border
    Cover Story
    Young Life at the Border
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    Testimony
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    Missions Experts Are Redefining ‘Unreached People Groups’
    News
    Why Missions Experts Are Redefining ‘Unreached People Groups’

May
Subscribe
Read These Next

    Trending
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Editor's Note
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Our publishing process was less than perfect.
    Mark Galli
    From the Magazine
    Young Life at the Border
    Cover Story
    Young Life at the Border
    How youth ministries are reaching teens torn between Mexico and the US.
    Bekah McNeel in El Paso
    Related
    Palm Sunday and the Gift of Disillusionment
    Holy Week
    Palm Sunday and the Gift of Disillusionment
    How the story of Jesus’ triumphal entry—and my chronic pain diagnosis—helped me trade in false hopes for a truer picture of God.
    Jonathan Merritt
    Editor's Pick
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    Testimony
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    How a gang leader found salvation in prison.
    Casey Diaz

    439
    tweet
    link

expand

    email
    print

Christianity Today

    Christianity Today:
    Home
    |
    FAQ
    |
    Masthead
    |
    Donate
    |
    Site Map
    |
    Terms & Conditions
    |
    Privacy Policy
    |
    Contact Us
    |
    Subscriber Help
    |
    Advertise
    |
    En Español
    |International: 
    CT Korea
    |
    Global Christianity
    |
    Log In

Stay informed. Sign up for our Free newsletter.
Christianity Today

        Give Today
        Who We Are
        What We Do
        Stories
        How to Partner
        Careers
        Media Room
        Follow Us
        Privacy Policy & Cookies
        Terms of Use
        Advertise
        Help
        Contact Us
        My Account

Beautiful Orthodoxy
Christianity Today strengthens the church by richly communicating the breadth of the true, good, and beautiful gospel.
Learn more
© 2019 Christianity Today - a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Back to top
Christianity Today

    Who We Are
    What We Do
    Newsletters
    Give Now

guest https://grow.pushpay.com/lp-ebook-toxic-leadership-vendor.html?utm_medium=display-paid&utm_source=christianity-today&utm_content=content-ebook&utm_campaign=toxic-leadership&utm_term=faith--all--all--vendor--pastors--728x90

    Sections 

Log InShopSubscribe
The Excahnge

    About
    Regular Columns
    Categories
    Podcasts
    Billy Graham Center
    Lausanne North America

Most Recent

    May 10Tommy Lee
    Developing Effective Partnerships with Christian Organizations
    May 9Chip Lamca
    From Venezuela to Peru
    May 8Ed Stetzer
    One-on-One with Leslie Keegel on Prayer for Sri Lanka
    May 6Ed Stetzer
    Reflecting on Rachel: Why She Mattered
    May 6Jeff Christopherson
    8 Simple (but not easy) Rules for Movement: Part 1 - Owning Our Commission

May 1, 2019Culture, Evangelism & Discipleship
One-on-One with Ronnie Floyd on the National Day of Prayer
“If we truly want unity and peace in America, we must return to God and remember that our highest calling is to love him and one another.”
Ed Stetzer AuthorBio
One-on-One with Ronnie Floyd on the National Day of Prayer
Image: discoveram.com
Tomorrow, May 2, is the National Day of Prayer—a day anticipated by many across this country. Each year we talk about it on The Exchange because I believe it’s important that all Christians take part in it on some level. Below I talk with Ronnie Floyd, president of the National Day of Prayer Task Force.
Ed Stetzer on Vimeo
Things to Check Out
The Arrival Church: Activating a Diversifying Mission ForceThe Arrival Church: Activating a Diversifying Mission Force
2019 Amplify Conference2019 Amplify Conference
View More
Current Issue
May 2019
Subscribe
May
Read This Issue

    Young Life at the BorderMissions Experts Are Redefining ‘Unreached People Groups’Fitness Trackers, Dating Apps, and Other Ladders to NowhereSubscriber access only

Free Newsletters
Get weekly updates from The Exchange delivered to your inbox. [Stay informed with updates from Edstetzer, CT Weekly and CT Books newsletters.]
More Newsletters

Ed: A quick glance at the news tells us America is still struggling with division and polarization. From your perspective, what is the spiritual state of America?

Ronnie: I was recently reading a Gallup poll on the emotional state of America. Honestly, I wasn’t surprised the pollsters found that Americans are among the most stressed people in the world or that nearly half of the U.S. population — 45 percent — feel burdened by worry. I definitely wasn’t surprised to learn 1 in 5 Americans experienced a lot of anger last year. But I was surprised by one detail in the poll that in itself speaks volumes: despite an improving economy, Americans are more stressed, more worried and angrier than in years past.

The report says, “The disconnect between a strong economy and Americans' increasing negative emotions illustrates how GDP and other hard economic data only tell part of the story. In fact, the levels of negative emotions in the past several years are even higher than during the U.S. recession years.”

What this tells us is that happiness and personal fulfillment are not necessarily dependent on our circumstances. Being a pastor, this makes perfect sense to me. I’ve seen it in people’s lives, and I see it in America as a whole. I believe America’s political and social problems — all the division, hostility and polarization we see every day — are actually problems of the human heart, and fixing them requires a spiritual solution. If we truly want unity and peace in America, we must return to God and remember that our highest calling is to love him and one another.

Ed: Some people may argue that America is a secular nation and that observing a National Day of Prayer actually violates the concept of church and state separation. What is your answer to that argument?

Ronnie: Although many people would make us believe America is a secular nation that wants nothing to do with religion, the truth is faith has always been a part of our story, and prayer, specifically, is an undeniable part of our DNA as a people.

In fact, if you look at every great moment in American history — whether it's the pilgrims kneeling at Plymouth Rock after reaching the New World, Rev. Jacob Duché’s prayer at the First Continental Congress as state delegates decided whether to declare independence from Great Britain or President Abraham Lincoln’s declaration for a day of prayer and fasting during the height of the Civil War — prayer always has been present in the room.

Our forefathers understood that America has prospered not necessarily because of how great we are as a people but because of how great God is and how much he has blessed us. This is why they repeatedly called for days of fasting and prayer for America. As a people, we are forgetful and we need to remember God’s providence and sovereignty.

The National Day of Prayer, first created in 1952 by a joint resolution of Congress and then designated as the first Thursday of May in 1988, follows in this great American tradition. It’s a day set aside for us to pray for our nation, our leaders and our communities and recognize God’s hand over our lives.

Ed: The theme for this National Day of Prayer is “Love One Another.” Why focus on love?

Ronnie: If we are honest with ourselves, as Christians we are really good at making ourselves known for a lot of things: where we stand on the sanctity of human life and the integrity of the family unity, our creeds and denominational affiliations, our achievements and institutions — you name it.

But when you look at Scripture, it’s pretty evident that we should be known for one — and only one — thing. “A new command I give you: Love one another,” Jesus says in John 13:34-35. “As I have loved you, so you must love one another. By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another.” The Apostle Paul takes it a step further in 1 Corinthians 13:3 when he says, “If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that I may boast, but do not have love, I gain nothing.”

Love is what sets us apart as Jesus’ followers. When we love one another — through hardship and heartbreak, pain and loss — the world sees God’s love in action. And it’s love that beckons us to cross whatever dividing lines society might have drawn between ourselves and other people and work toward healing and unity.

Recently, love has been painfully absent in America, including in the church. This is why we are emphasizing the theme of love and reminding the church that it’s our highest calling.

Ed: The National Day of Prayer is coming up next Thursday. What’s your vision for it, and how can churches get involved?

Ronnie: We are expecting thousands upon thousands of public gatherings across all 50 states that will pray for a “Love One Another” movement to sweep over America — from our homes to our churches, communities, local governments, Congress, the White House and beyond. We are believing God can change our nation if we turn to him with our whole hearts.

Every church in America can participate in the National Day of Prayer on Thursday, May 2. Our website, NationalDayofPrayer.org, has a digital toolbox with prayer guides, videos and a platform to create a prayer event in your community or find one near you.

We also will live stream the National Observance which will be held Thursday at National Statuary Hall in the U.S. Capitol at 7:30 p.m. EST. People can join via our Facebook page, website and via their local Daystar TV channel.

Support our work. Subscribe to CT and get one year free.
TwitterReply on Twitter
FacebookJoin the conversation on Facebook
Tags:
National Day of Prayer | Prayer | United States
Posted:
May 1, 2019
More from The Exchange

    Trending
    Reflecting on Rachel: Why She Mattered
    May 6, 2019Culture, Leadership
    Reflecting on Rachel: Why She Mattered
    Watching the reaction to RHE's death has reminded me that we need to be a safe place for people who wander, and for people who wonder.
    Ed Stetzer
    Related
    One-on-One with Leslie Keegel on Prayer for Sri Lanka
    May 8, 2019Interviews
    One-on-One with Leslie Keegel on Prayer for Sri Lanka
    “Our highest priority has been to pray.”
    Ed Stetzer
    Related
    When Was Your Church’s Last Haystack Prayer Meeting?
    March 28, 2019Church Planting, Evangelism & Discipleship, Rural Churches
    When Was Your Church’s Last Haystack Prayer Meeting?
    Many evangelical mission organizations trace their history back to the Haystack Prayer Meeting.
    Ronnie Floyd
    Most Recent
    Developing Effective Partnerships with Christian Organizations
    May 10, 2019Evangelism & Discipleship, Leadership
    Developing Effective Partnerships with Christian Organizations
    Six practical steps to help bolster partnerships in the kingdom of God.
    Tommy Lee

    524
    tweet
    link

expand

    email
    print

Christianity Today

    The Exchange:
    Home
    |
    EdStetzer.com
    |
    About
    |
    Resources
    |
    Speaking
    |
    Subscribe
    |
    Log In

Stay informed. Sign up for our Free newsletter.
Christianity Today

        Give Today
        Who We Are
        What We Do
        Stories
        How to Partner
        Careers
        Media Room
        Follow Us
        Privacy Policy & Cookies
        Terms of Use
        Advertise
        Help
        Contact Us
        My Account

Beautiful Orthodoxy
Christianity Today strengthens the church by richly communicating the breadth of the true, good, and beautiful gospel.
Learn more
© 2019 Christianity Today - a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Back to top
$$$
Christianity Today

    Who We Are
    What We Do
    Newsletters
    Give Now

Subscribe to the Galli Report Newsletter
Christianity Today
Log in|Shop

    Sections Our LatestThe Magazine Subscribe

Trending

    News
    Died: Warren Wiersbe, Preachers’ Favorite Bible Commentator
    Caleb Lindgren
    News
    Terrorists in Burkina Faso Execute Six at Pentecostal Church
    Kate Shellnutt
    Jean Vanier Made Us All More Human
    Bethany McKinney Fox
    How the Bible Project Is Using Video to Get People into Scripture Again
    Paul J. Pastor
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Mark Galli

Views

| Editorial
Repenting of Identity Politics
New Zealand revealed the tragic logical end of evils like Christian Nationalism.
Mark Galli| April 22, 2019
Repenting of Identity Politics
Image: Illustration by Mallory Rentsch

The March massacre of 50 Muslims during worship in New Zealand was first and foremost a human tragedy, one felt deeply around the world. Unfortunately the massacre also signaled a political tragedy, displaying the logical end to a type of engagement increasingly defining the public square: identity politics.

As British columnist Brendan O’Neill put it, “Increasingly, it feels like the New Zealand atrocity is what happens when the politics of identity, the reduction of everyone to cultural or racial creatures whose relationship with other cultural and racial cultures must be monitored and managed, comes to be the only game in public life.”

The simplest definition of identity politics is summarized at Wikipedia: “a tendency of people sharing a particular racial, religious, ethnic, social, or cultural identity to form exclusive political alliances, instead of engaging in traditional broad-based party politics, or promote their particular interests without regard for interests of a larger political group.” Adherents have no interest in broad-based politics because they believe that no other group can empathize sufficiently with them to truly understand their group. Only one born into the group identity, or who becomes “woke” through a kind of revelation, truly knows the score.

Without genuine understanding between groups, the only way to gain political influence is through the raw use of power. Political power for those who are patient. Violence for those who are not. But the bottom line is the same: It’s about and only about gaining power for the benefit of your group and at the expense of other groups. This is not to suggest that every current advocate of identity politics champions ...
Subscriber access only You have reached the end of this Article Preview

To continue reading, subscribe now. Subscribers have full digital access.
Log inSubscribe

Already a CT subscriber? Log in for full digital access.
TwitterReply on Twitter
FacebookJoin the conversation on Facebook
Tags:
IdolatryPatriotism and Nationalism
From Issue:
May 2019, Vol. 63, No. 4, Pg 23, "Repenting of Identity Politics"
May
Support our work
Subscribe to CT and get one year free.
More from this Issue
Read This Issue
This article is from the May 2019 issue.

    Small Groups Anonymous
    Discipleship
    Small Groups AnonymousSubscriber Access Only
    Missions Experts Are Redefining ‘Unreached People Groups’
    News
    Why Missions Experts Are Redefining ‘Unreached People Groups’
    Fitness Trackers, Dating Apps, and Other Ladders to Nowhere
    Book Review
    Fitness Trackers, Dating Apps, and Other Ladders to NowhereSubscriber Access Only

May
Subscribe
Read These Next

    Trending
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Editor's Note
    RE: Rachel Held Evans
    Our publishing process was less than perfect.
    Mark Galli
    From the Magazine
    Worship God at All Times. If Necessary, Use Music.
    Biblical Theology
    Worship God at All Times. If Necessary, Use Music.Subscriber Access Only
    It turns out the Bible’s idea of worship is mostly about posture, not music or praise.
    Daniel I. Block
    Related
    Idolatry Is Alive Today: Why Modern Church Leaders Still Fight an Old Battle
    The Exchange
    Idolatry Is Alive Today: Why Modern Church Leaders Still Fight an Old Battle
    Idolatry is still trying to work its way into our lives.
    Ed Stetzer
    Editor's Pick
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    Testimony
    I Marked People for Death. Jesus Marked Me for Life.
    How a gang leader found salvation in prison.
    Casey Diaz

    6158
    tweet
    link

expand

    email
    print

Christianity Today

    Christianity Today:
    Home
    |
    FAQ
    |
    Masthead
    |
    Donate
    |
    Site Map
    |
    Terms & Conditions
    |
    Privacy Policy
    |
    Contact Us
    |
    Subscriber Help
    |
    Advertise
    |
    En Español
    |International: 
    CT Korea
    |
    Global Christianity
    |
    Log In

Stay informed. Sign up for our Free newsletter.
Christianity Today

        Give Today
        Who We Are
        What We Do
        Stories
        How to Partner
        Careers
        Media Room
        Follow Us
        Privacy Policy & Cookies
        Terms of Use
        Advertise
        Help
        Contact Us
        My Account

Beautiful Orthodoxy
Christianity Today strengthens the church by richly communicating the breadth of the true, good, and beautiful gospel.
Learn more
© 2019 Christianity Today - a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Back to top
$$$



Sign In
Plan a Trip

    Before you Go
    Accommodation
    Transportation
    Learn
    Suggested Itineraries
    Tour Packages
    Living

    Learn	
    ›
    Religion	

Christianity	

The first Europeans to Japan came from Portugal and landed on Kyushu in Western Japan in 1542, bringing both gunpowder and Christianity along with them. The Japanese lords on Kyushu welcomed these new visitors for the weapons they brought with them and tolerated the Jesuit missionaries that came together as part of the package.

The missionaries were eventually successful in converting considerable numbers of people in Western Japan, including members of the ruling class. Christianity could be practiced openly, and in 1550, Francis Xavier undertook a mission to Kyoto to seek an audience with the Emperor.

However in 1587, in an era of European colonization and Christianization of the nearby Philippines, Toyotomi Hideyoshi issued an edict banning missionaries from the country due to the religion's growing power, intolerant behavior towards Shinto and Buddhism, and involvement in the sale of Japanese people as slaves overseas. In 1597, Hideyoshi proclaimed a more serious banning edict and executed 26 Christians in Nagasaki as a warning.

Intent to bring Japan under complete control, the succeeding Tokugawa Shogunate further hardened the country's anti-Christian stance, accusing the religion of obstructing the authorities, antisocial behavior and intolerance towards the established religions. After a rebellion on the Shimabara Peninsula that involved many Christians in the late 1630s, thousands of rebels were executed and a full ban on Christianity became strictly enforced. Only small pockets of Christians, known as the "Hidden Christians", continued practicing their religion in secret.
Statues used by the hidden Christians to practice their religion in secret

Following the Meiji Restoration, freedom of religion was promulgated and the number of Japanese Christians has been slowly increasing again. Today, about one to two million Japanese are Christians (about one percent of Japan's population), and churches can be found across the country. Many Christians live in Western Japan where the missionaries' activities were greatest during the 16th century.

A few Christian customs that have become popular among the non-Christian population in modern-day Japan include Christian wedding ceremonies, where brides wear white wedding dresses and where the couple exchange their vows at wedding chapels.
Christmas Cake

Events like Valentine's Day and Christmas have developed secular status, and retail marketing for these celebrations contribute to their popularity. Seasonally appropriate gifts and decorations start lining the shelves weeks in advance, and illumination events are held. Note that while commonly celebrated by the populace, Valentine's Day and Christmas are not national holidays in Japan.

The following is a list of tourist sites related to Christianity in Japan:
Kumamoto Prefecture
Amakusa Islands	
The isolated location of Amakusa and the fact that the islands are close to where Europeans used to enter Japan in the old days, allowed missionaries to convert many inhabitants and even the local lord to Christianity before the religion was banned in the early Edo Period. Today there are numerous museums and churches spread across the islands which reflect this religious heritage.
Shimabara Peninsula
Hara Castle Ruins	
Just north of Amakusa, the Shimabara Peninsula was also ruled by a Christian lord into the early Edo Period. The peninsula later became the site of the Shimabara Rebellion, a major uprising by peasants from Amakusa and Shimabara - many of whom were Christians - that was forcefully ended by shogunate forces at Hara Castle.
Nagasaki
Oura Catholic Church	
Considered the oldest Christian church in Japan, the Oura Catholic Church in Nagasaki was constructed in the last years of the Edo Period. It initially catered to the community of foreign merchants in the city.
Sotome
Shitsu Church and Ono Church	
During the ban on Christianity, several Christians resettled to the remote Sotome coast north of Nagasaki City to practice their religion in secret. When the ban was lifted in the late 1800s, many of them rejoined the Catholic Church and constructed churches with the support of foreign priests.
Sasebo
Kuroshima Church	
The isolated Kuroshima Island off the coast of Sasebo was another place where many hidden Christians lived during the ban on Christianity. After freedom of religion had been granted, the local parish erected an impressive, Romanesque-style church in the center of the island's town.
Hirado
Hirado Christian Sites	
Hirado in northern Nagasaki Prefecture is another place where several communities of hidden Christians continued to practice their religion in secret in isolated villages through the ban on Christianity. After the end of the ban, several churches were constructed on the island, and a couple of local museums are now dedicated to their history.
Goto Islands
Goto Islands	
The remote Goto Island chain was another place where many hidden Christians resided during the Edo Period. After the ban on the religion was lifted, large numbers of churches were built on the islands, especially on the most populated islands of Fukue and Nakadori.
Yamaguchi
St. Francis Xavier Memorial Church	
The St. Francis Xavier Memorial Church in Yamaguchi was built in 1952 and commemorates the Jesuit missionary Francis Xavier, who was active in spreading Christianity to Asia in the 1500s. The current building was reconstructed in 1998 after the original was destroyed in a fire. Religious artwork and Xavier's travel history are on display in the museum inside the church.
Tsuwano
Tsuwano Catholic Church	
The Tsuwano Catholic Church in Tsuwano was built in 1931 by a Catholic priest from Germany. The church features tatami mats instead of pews. Next to the church stands a small museum with exhibits related to the Christians who were relocated to and persecuted in Tsuwano in the period between the opening of the country in the 1850s and the granting of freedom of religion in 1873.
Tsuwano
Otome Toge Maria Chapel	
The Otome Toge Maria Chapel (Maria Seido Chapel) in Tsuwano, was built in 1951 in memory of Christians who were relocated to and persecuted there in the late 1800s. Christianity was prohibited in Japan during the Edo Period until 1873, about five years after the Meiji Restoration, and some Christians who openly professed their faith before that date were still prosecuted.
Tokyo
Saint Nicolai Church	
The Saint Nicolai Church, the main cathedral of the Japanese Orthodox Church, was built in 1891 after Saint Nikolai moved the Orthodox Church headquarters from Hakodate to Tokyo. The current building was reconstructed in 1929 after the original cathedral had been damaged in the 1923 Great Kanto Earthquake. The church has been popular since the Meiji Period for its Byzantine architecture featuring a domed roof and a bell tower.
Karuizawa
Stone Church	
The Stone Church in Karuizawa is an excellent work of architecture. The artistic stone structure blends flawlessly into the surrounding woods; its appearance like a scene from a fairy tale, inviting people to take a closer look. The church's interior is equally imaginative and charming - the reason why this is a popular venue for weddings. When not used for weddings, the Stone Church is open to the public.
Towada
Christ's Grave	
Christ's Grave is an unusual site 25 kilometers east of Lake Towada where the purported grave of Jesus Christ lies. The claim is widely regarded as an unfounded legend despite the existence of "ancient religious papers" which explain that Jesus actually fled to Japan where he lived his final years and eventually died.
Hakodate
Hakodate Orthodox Church	
The Russian Orthodox Church in Hakodate was established in 1859, and the current building was constructed in 1916. It was the first Orthodox Church in Japan as well as the headquarters of the Japanese Orthodox Church. The church remains one of the more famous, foreign-looking buildings in Hakodate's Motomachi District.
Book your trip

    Hotels
    Flights
    Car
    Buses
    Tours

With:
Book your trip

    Hotels
    Flights
    Car
    Buses
    Tours

With:
Plan Your Trip:
Religion

Japan Travel News
7 photo spots to capture Tokyo Tower
Travel Guide
Cherry Blossoms 2019
Cherry Blossoms
New Emperor ascends the throne
Travel News
Old and New in Kiyosumi Shirakawa
Chotto Zeitaku Japan
How to use trains
Travel Guide
2019 Golden Week: 10 consecutive holidays
Travel News
Survey: What is your favorite accommodation type in Japan?
Regular Hotel
Business Hotel
Capsule Hotel
Hostel
Airbnb
Ryokan
Minshuku
Temple Lodging
Overnight Bus
See Results
Anything we can improve?
Page last updated: May 7, 2018	
Tokyo
Kyoto
Osaka
Nara
Mount Fuji
Hiroshima
Kamakura
Kobe
Nagoya
Hakone
Nikko
Hokkaido
Tohoku
Kanto
Chubu
Kansai
Chugoku
Shikoku
Kyushu
Okinawa
Temples
Shrines
Castles
Onsen
Food and Drink
Manga and Anime
Gardens
Hiking
Shopping
Flowers
Before You Go
Itineraries
Tours
Learn
Transportation
Accommodation
Living in Japan
Disaster Updates
Sites under construction
3.11 Recovery Reports
Cherry Blossoms 2019
Autumn Colors 2018
Chotto Zeitaku Japan
Craft Beer Japan
Among the Peaks
Far Flung Japan
Golf in Japan
Solo Female Travel
Kansai By Rail
Question Forum
User Reports
Sign in and subscribe for the latest Japan travel news and updates.
Sign up
About us Employment Contact us Advertising 広告について Privacy & Terms
Copyright © 1996-2019 japan-guide.com All Rights Reserved.
$$$



Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World

About Follow
My Account
Donate

Pew Research Center

Religion & Public Life

    Home
    U.S. Politics
    Media & News
    Social Trends
    Religion
    Internet & Tech
    Science
    Hispanics
    Global
    Methods

    Publications
    Topics
    Interactives
    Data and Resources
    Experts

Demographic Study
December 19, 2011
Global Christianity – A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World’s Christian Population

lede_globalchristianity

A comprehensive demographic study of more than 200 countries finds that there are 2.18 billion Christians of all ages around the world, representing nearly a third of the estimated 2010 global population of 6.9 billion. Christians are also geographically widespread – so far-flung, in fact, that no single continent or region can indisputably claim to be the center of global Christianity.

A century ago, this was not the case. In 1910, about two-thirds of the world’s Christians lived in Europe, where the bulk of Christians had been for a millennium, according to historical estimates by the Center for the Study of Global Christianity.2 Today, only about a quarter of all Christians live in Europe (26%). A plurality – more than a third – now are in the Americas (37%). About one in every four Christians lives in sub-Saharan Africa (24%), and about one-in-eight is found in Asia and the Pacific (13%).

Regional Distribution of Christians

The number of Christians around the world has nearly quadrupled in the last 100 years, from about 600 million in 1910 to more than 2 billion in 2010. But the world’s overall population also has risen rapidly, from an estimated 1.8 billion in 1910 to 6.9 billion in 2010. As a result, Christians make up about the same portion of the world’s population today (32%) as they did a century ago (35%).

This apparent stability, however, masks a momentous shift. Although Europe and the Americas still are home to a majority of the world’s Christians (63%), that share is much lower than it was in 1910 (93%). And the proportion of Europeans and Americans who are Christian has dropped from 95% in 1910 to 76% in 2010 in Europe as a whole, and from 96% to 86% in the Americas as a whole.

Major Christian Traditions

At the same time, Christianity has grown enormously in sub-Saharan Africa and the Asia-Pacific region, where there were relatively few Christians at the beginning of the 20th century. The share of the population that is Christian in sub-Saharan Africa climbed from 9% in 1910 to 63% in 2010, while in the Asia-Pacific region it rose from 3% to 7%. Christianity today – unlike a century ago – is truly a global faith. (See world maps weighted by Christian population in 1910 and 2010.)

These are some of the key findings of Global Christianity: A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World’s Christian Population, a new study by the Pew Research Center’s Forum on Religion & Public Life.

The study is based primarily on a country-by-country analysis of about 2,400 data sources, including censuses and nationally representative population surveys. For some countries, such as China, the Pew Forum’s estimates also take into account statistics from church groups, government reports and other sources. (See Appendix C [PDF] for more details on the range of estimates available for China.)

Christians are diverse theologically as well as geographically, the new study finds. About half are Catholic. Protestants, broadly defined, make up 37%. Orthodox Christians comprise 12% of Christians worldwide. Other Christians, such as Mormons and Jehovah’s Witnesses, make up the remaining 1% of the global Christian population. (See Defining Christian Traditions.)

Taken as a whole, however, Christians are by far the world’s largest religious group. Muslims, the second-largest group, make up a little less than a quarter of the world’s population, according to previous studies by the Pew Forum.3

Almost half (48%) of all Christians live in the 10 countries with the largest number of Christians. Three of the top 10 countries are in the Americas (the United States, Brazil and Mexico). Two are in Europe (Russia and Germany), two are in the Asia-Pacific region (the Philippines and China), and three are in sub-Saharan Africa (Nigeria, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ethiopia), reflecting Christianity’s global reach.

10 countries with the largest number of christiansgc-exec-tease

Clearly, Christianity has spread far from its historical origins. For example:

    Though Christianity began in the Middle East-North Africa, today that region has both the   lowest concentration of Christians (about 4% of the region’s population) and the smallest   number of Christians (about 13 million) of any major geographic region.
    Indonesia, a Muslim-majority country, is home to more Christians than all 20 countries in   the Middle East-North Africa region combined.
    Nigeria now has more than twice as many Protestants (broadly defined to include Anglicans   and independent churches) as Germany, the birthplace of the Protestant Reformation.
    Brazil has more than twice as many Catholics as Italy.
    Although Christians comprise just under a third of the world’s people, they form a majority of the population in 158 countries and territories, about two-thirds of all the countries and territories in the world.
    About 90% of Christians live in countries where Christians are in the majority; only about 10% of Christians worldwide live as minorities.

Global Distribution of Christians

So where are the bulk of the world’s Christians today? The Pew Forum study suggests at least four possible answers, depending on how one divides up the world:

The Global South

In recent years, a number of scholarly books and articles have discussed the rapid growth of Christianity in the developing countries of the “Global South” – especially Africa, Asia and Latin America – and debated whether the influence of Christians in the “Global North” is waning, or not.4 A century ago, the Global North (commonly defined as North America, Europe, Australia, Japan and New Zealand) contained more than four times as many Christians as the Global South (the rest of the world).5 Today, the Pew Forum study finds, more than 1.3 billion Christians live in the Global South (61%), compared with about 860 million in the Global North (39%).

The Global North

But even though Christians are more numerous in the Global South, the concentration of Christians is much higher in the Global North, where 69% of the population is Christian. By contrast, 24% of the people living in the Global South are Christian. This reflects the fact that the total population of the Global South is about 4.5 times greater than the population of the Global North.

christian population by global north / global south, 1910 and 2010

Another way of looking at the distribution of Christians around the world is by region. Numerically, at least, Europe no longer dominates global Christianity the way it did 100 years ago. Rather, the bulk of Christians are in:

The Americas

Of the world’s five major geographic regions, the Americas have both the largest number and the highest proportion of Christians. More than a third of Christians worldwide (37%) live in the Americas, where nearly nine-in-ten people (86%) are Christian. The three countries with the largest Christian populations – the United States, Brazil and Mexico – are in the Americas. Together, these three countries alone account for nearly one in every four Christians in the world (24%), about the same proportion as the whole of Europe (26%) and all of sub-Saharan Africa (24%). Although Christians make up a smaller portion of the 2010 population in the Americas (86%) than they did in 1910 (96%), the Americas account for a higher share of the world’s Christians (37%, up from 27% in 1910).6

christian population by region 1910 and 2010

Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia-Pacific

But sub-Saharan Africa and the Asia-Pacific region now have a combined population of about 800 million Christians, roughly the same as the Americas. And five of the top 10 countries with the largest Christian populations are either in Africa (Nigeria, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ethiopia) or Asia (Philippines and China). Moreover, the fastest growth in the number of Christians over the past century has been in sub-Saharan Africa (a roughly 60-fold increase, from fewer than 9 million in 1910 to more than 516 million in 2010) and in the Asia-Pacific region (a roughly 10-fold increase, from about 28 million in 1910 to more than 285 million in 2010).
How Estimates Were Generated

The Pew Forum, in consultation with demographers at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Laxenburg, Austria, acquired and analyzed about 2,400 data sources, including censuses and general population surveys, to arrive at Christian population figures for 232 countries and self-administering territories – all the countries and territories for which the United Nations Population Division provides overall population estimates. (See Appendix A [PDF] for a more detailed explanation of how the estimates were made; see Appendix D [PDF] for a list of data sources by country.)

gc-exec-all-tease

In many countries, however, censuses and surveys do not contain detailed information on denominational and religious movement affiliations. Christian organizations remain in many cases the only source of information on the size of global movements within Christianity (such as evangelicalism and pentecostalism) and on Protestant denominational families (such as Baptists and Methodists). The figures in this report on pentecostal, charismatic and evangelical Christians and on Protestant denominational families were commissioned by the Pew Forum from the Center for the Study of Global Christianity at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary in South Hamilton, Mass., whose researchers generated estimates based in large part on figures provided by Christian organizations around the world. Readers should bear in mind that these breakdowns were derived differently from the overall Christian population estimates.

christians by movement
According to the Center for the Study of Global Christianity, there are about 279 million pentecostal Christians and 305 million charismatic Christians worldwide. (Charismatic Christians belong to non-pentecostal denominations yet engage in spiritual practices associated with pentecostalism, such as speaking in tongues and divine healing; see Defining Christian Movements.)

In addition, more than 285 million Christians can be classified as evangelicals because they either belong to churches affiliated with regional or global evangelical associations, or because they identify as evangelicals. Since many pentecostals and charismatics are also evangelicals, these categories are not mutually exclusive. (For more details, see Christian Movements and Denominations.)

Footnotes:

2 Historical figures throughout the executive summary are courtesy of Todd M. Johnson of the Center for the Study of Global Christianity at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary in South Hamilton, Mass. Johnson is co-editor of the Atlas of Global Christianity, Edinburgh University Press, 2009. (return to text)

3 As of 2010, there were about 1.6 billion Muslims worldwide, representing 23.4% of the global population. For more details, see the Pew Research Center’s Forum on Religion & Public Life, The Future of the Global Muslim Population: Projections for 2010-2030, January 2011, and Pew Research Center’s Forum on Religion & Public Life, Mapping the Global Muslim Population: A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World’s Muslim Population, October 2009. As noted in the preface of this report, the Pew Forum is gradually compiling baseline population estimates and projecting future growth rates for the world’s major faiths. (return to text)

4 See, for example, Philip Jenkins, The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global Christianity, Oxford University Press, 2002; Robert Wuthnow, Boundless Faith: The Global Outreach of American Churches, University of California Press, 2009; and Mark A. Noll, The New Shape of World Christianity: How American Experience Reflects Global Faith, InterVarsity Press, 2009. (return to text)

5 This common definition of Global North and Global South is not a simple geographic division of the world into Northern and Southern hemispheres. Rather, it takes into account levels of economic development as well as geography. Figures for 1910 are from a Pew Forum analysis of data from the Center for the Study of Global Christianity. (return to text)

6 Figures for 1910 are from a Pew Forum analysis of data from the Center for the Study of Global Christianity. (return to text)
Pagination
Next: Preface
Next Page →
← Prev Page

    You are reading page 1
    Page 2
    Page 3
    Page 4
    Page 5
    Page 6

Report Materials

    Complete Report PDF
    Appendix A: Methodology for Overall Christian and Christian Tradition Estimates
    Appendix B: Methodology for Estimating Christian Movements
    Appendix C: Methodology for China
    Appendix D: Data Sources by Country
    Map: Global Christianity
    Table: Global Christianity
    Quiz: How much do you know about Christianity around the world?

Table of Contents

    Overview
        Global Distribution of Christians
        How Estimates Were Generated
    Preface
    Living as Majorities and Minorities
    Christian Traditions
    Regional Distribution of Christians
    Christian Movements and Denominations

Related
PublicationsDec 18, 2012
The Global Religious Landscape
InteractivesMar 8, 2012
Quiz: Faith on the Move
InteractivesMar 8, 2012
Map: Faith on the Move
PublicationsMar 8, 2012
Faith on the Move - The Religious Affiliation of International Migrants
InteractivesDec 19, 2011
Quiz: How much do you know about Christianity around the world?
Topics

    Religious Affiliation
    Religious Beliefs and Practices
    Christians and Christianity
    Demographics
    Population Trends
    Middle East and North Africa
    Sub-Saharan Africa
    Latin America
    North America
    Europe
    Asia and the Pacific
    Migration
    Population Geography

Popular On Pew Research

Fact Tank01/17/2019
Defining generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins

Fact Tank09/06/2018
Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income calculator

Fact Tank11/28/2018
5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S.

Internet & Tech03/01/2018
Social Media Use in 2018

Social Trends01/17/2019
Generation Z Looks a Lot Like Millennials on Key Social and Political Issues
Get Pew Research Center data by email
Make a financial contribution to support our work
Donate

Pew Research Center 1615 L St. NW, Suite 800 Washington, DC 20036 USA
(+1) 202-419-4300 | Main
(+1) 202-419-4349 | Fax
(+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries
Research Areas

    U.S. Politics & Policy
    Journalism & Media
    Internet & Technology
    Science & Society
    Religion & Public Life
    Hispanic Trends
    Global Attitudes & Trends
    Social & Demographic Trends

Follow Us

    Email Newsletters
    Facebook
    Twitter
    Tumblr
    YouTube
    RSS

About Pew Research Center Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic research, media content analysis and other empirical social science research. Pew Research Center does not take policy positions. It is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.

    Copyright 2019 Pew Research Center
    About
    Terms & Conditions
    Privacy Policy
    Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy
    Feedback
    Careers

Advertisement
Advertisement
$$$


Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World
About
Follow
My Account
Donate
Pew Research Center
Home
U.S. Politics
Media & News
Social Trends
Religion
Internet & Tech
Science
Hispanics
Global
Methods

    Publications
    Topics
    Datasets
    Interactives
    Fact Tank
    Experts

NEWS IN THE NUMBERS
April 5, 2017
Christians remain world’s largest religious group, but they are declining in Europe
By Conrad Hackett and David McClendon

Christians remained the largest religious group in the world in 2015, making up nearly a third (31%) of Earth’s 7.3 billion people, according to a new Pew Research Center demographic analysis. But the report also shows that the number of Christians in what many consider the religion’s heartland, the continent of Europe, is in decline.

Christians had the most births and deaths of any religious group in recent years, according to our demographic models. Between 2010 and 2015, an estimated 223 million babies were born to Christian mothers and roughly 107 million Christians died – a natural increase of 116 million. 

But among Christians in Europe the reverse is true: Deaths outnumbered births by nearly 6 million during this brief period. In Germany alone, there were an estimated 1.4 million more Christian deaths than births from 2010 to 2015. This natural decrease in Europe’s aging Christian population was unique compared with Christians in other parts of the world and other religious groups. In fact, Muslims and the unaffiliated in Europe both experienced natural increases in their populations, with our new report estimating that there were over 2 million and 1 million more births than deaths, respectively, between 2010 and 2015.

Globally, Muslims make up the second largest religious group, with 1.8 billion people, or 24% of the world’s population, followed by religious “nones” (16%), Hindus (15%) and Buddhists (7%). Adherents of folk religions, Jews and members of other religions make up smaller shares of the world’s people.

Muslims experienced the greatest natural increase among all religious groups, including Christians. Births to Muslims between 2010 and 2015 outnumbered deaths by 152 million (213 million births vs. 61 million deaths). Globally, all major groups had more births than deaths.

Not all babies will remain in the religion of their mother, of course. In some countries, including the United States, it is fairly common for adults to leave their childhood religion and switch to another faith (or no faith). Globally, however, the effect of religious switching is overshadowed by the impact of differences in fertility and mortality.

Indeed, fertility differences between religious groups are one of the key factors behind current population trends and will be important for future growth. Globally, Muslims have the highest fertility rate of any religious group – an average of 2.9 children per woman, well above replacement level (2.1), the minimum typically needed to maintain a stable population. This fertility advantage is one reason why Muslims are expected to catch up with Christians in absolute number and as a share of the global population in the coming decades. Christians have the second highest fertility rate, at 2.6 children per woman. Hindu and Jewish fertility (2.3 each) are both just below the global average of 2.4 children per woman. All other major religious groups have fertility levels too low to sustain their populations.

Age differences are also important for future growth. Some religious groups’ adherents are predominantly young, with their prime childbearing years still ahead of them, while members of other groups are older and largely past their childbearing years. Muslims have the youngest median age (24) of all religious groups, which is also expected to contribute to their rapid growth. Hindus (27) are also younger than the median age of the world’s overall population (30), while the median age of Christians (30) matches the global median. All the other groups are older than the global median, which is part of the reason they are expected to fall behind the pace of global population growth.

Related posts:

Christians faced widespread harassment in 2015, but mostly in Christian-majority countries

10 facts about religion in America
Topics:
Christians and Christianity
Muslims and Islam
Religious Affiliation
Europe
Share this link:
Conrad Hackett  is a senior demographer and associate director of research at Pew Research Center.	
POSTS	BIO	TWITTER	EMAIL
David McClendon  is a research associate focusing on religion research at Pew Research Center.	
POSTS	BIO	EMAIL
MAKE A FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION TO SUPPORT OUR WORK
DONATE
About Fact Tank

Real-time analysis and news about data from Pew Research Center writers and social scientists.
Twitter RSS Archive
Related
Fact TankApril 7, 2015
Christianity poised to continue its shift from Europe to Africa
Pew Research CenterApril 7, 2017
Why people with no religion are projected to decline as a share of the world’s population
Pew Research CenterApril 6, 2017
Why Muslims are the world’s fastest-growing religious group
Fact TankMarch 22, 2013
Number of Christians Rises, But Their Share of World Population Stays Stable
Fact TankApril 2, 2015
7 key changes in the global religious landscape
Popular on Fact Tank
Fact TankJanuary 17, 2019
Defining generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins
Fact TankSeptember 6, 2018
Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income calculator
Fact TankNovember 28, 2018
5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S.
Fact TankNovember 30, 2018
Key findings about U.S. immigrants
Fact TankApril 5, 2017
Christians remain world’s largest religious group, but they are declining in Europe

Pew Research Center
1615 L St. NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036
USA
(+1) 202-419-4300 | Main
(+1) 202-857-8562 | Fax
(+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries
Research Areas
U.S. Politics & Policy
Journalism & Media
Internet & Technology
Science & Society
Religion & Public Life
Hispanic Trends
Global Attitudes & Trends
Social & Demographic Trends
Methods
Follow Us
Email Newsletters
Facebook
Twitter
Tumblr
YouTube
RSS

About Pew Research Center Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic research, media content analysis and other empirical social science research. Pew Research Center does not take policy positions. It is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.
Copyright 2019 Pew Research Center About Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy Feedback Careers
$$$

Christianity Today

    Who We Are
    What We Do
    Newsletters
    Give Now

https://grow.pushpay.com/lp-ebook-toxic-leadership-vendor.html?utm_medium=display-paid&utm_source=christianity-today&utm_content=content-ebook&utm_campaign=toxic-leadership&utm_term=faith--all--all--vendor--pastors--728x90
Christian Bible Studies

    CartHelp & InfoFAQLog in

Articles | Quizzes
Answers to Bible Questions
Church Discipleship Campaigns
Quarterly Plans | One-Year Tracks

    Audience
        Women
        Men
        Singles
        Teenagers
        Seniors
        New Believers
    CT Studies
        CT Current Issues
        CT Marriage & Family
        CT Spiritual Formation
        CT Theology
        CT eBooks
    Bible Book Studies
        Old Testament
        New Testament
        Bible Study Basics
        LifeGuide Studies
        Great Teachers of the Bible
    Spiritual Growth
        Spiritual Formation
        Church Life
        Christian History
        Overcoming Sins
        Theology
        Worship
        Prayer
    Marriage & Family
        Marriage
        Parenting
    Ethics
        Health & Life
        Politics
        Money
        Sex & Marriage
    OutreachCulture
        Movie Discussion Guides
        Christians in Culture
    Holidays
        Advent & Christmas
        Lent & Easter
        Thanksgiving
        Fourth of July
        New Year's

Home > Spiritual Growth > Spiritual Formation
Becoming a Follower of Christ
Becoming a Follower of Christ
This five-session course looks at all the aspects involved in fully devoting your life to follow Christ.
5 Session Bible Study

    5
    tweet
    share

expand

    email
    print

Following Christ involves a wholehearted commitment. We cannot see a relationship with Christ as simply a ticket into heaven. When we answer the call to follow him, it's going to turn our lives in a different direction. We can't follow unless we go where he leads. This five-session course looks at centering our lives on Christ, weathering the storms of life, going where Jesus goes, caring for others, and focusing on God's grace. Note: This course was developed with Community Christian Church and New Thing Network.
Session One

Centering Our Lives on Jesus
Everyone who wants to follow Jesus is called to a whole-life commitment and change.
Luke 9:57–62; 2 Peter 1:3–11

In this study, investigate the wholeness of biblical Christianity - about all of our lives centering on Jesus: who is most important to us, what our lives are all about, and how we live 24/7.
Session Two

Weather the Storm
God never promised that life would be easy, but he assures us that he is always in control and will always be with us.
Psalm 23; Mark 4:35–41; Acts 27:1, 14–26; 1 Peter 5:6–11

This study will help you grow your faith in troubled times by finding out more about who Jesus really is.
Session Three

Go Where Jesus Goes
Going where Jesus goes is a risky proposition, but the rewards far outweigh the risk.
Matthew 14:25–31; Luke 9:23–26; Acts14:19–20; 16:1–3

Peter saw the power and significance of Jesus' life in his sovereignty over even the elements of nature, and he wanted to experience it, too. He wanted to join Jesus in doing what only Jesus could do.
Session Four

Following Christ Means Caring for Others
God often meets people's needs through his followers.
Luke 9:10–17; John 6:25–40; James 1:27; 2:14–19

This study will challenge us to care about the needs of others as Jesus does.
Session Five

Focus on God's Grace
We an never earn God's favor.
Luke 11:23; John 1:1–5; Ephesians 1:3–23

This study will encourage and reassure you that God accepts you and will give you the power to do anything he asks.

Total number of pages - 37
100% Customer Satisfaction Guarantee
If you are not completely satisfied with the product you purchase, please contact us and we'll provide your next one completely free!
Tags:Christlikeness|Faith|Giving|Grace|Jesus Christ|Relationships|Service|Suffering|Trials
Category:Spiritual Growth
References:Psalm 23|Matthew 14:25-31|Mark 4:35-41|Luke 9:23-26|Luke 9:57-62|John 6:25-40|Ephesians 1:3-23|James 1:27|2 Peter 1:3-11
Posted:February 07, 2007
Related Bible Studies
Single in the Church
Single in the Church
Fully engaging in the church as a single person.
3 Session Bible Study
Chi Chi Okwu
$14.95Add to Cart
An Unremarkable Testimony
An Unremarkable Testimony
Some of us can’t pinpoint a moment of conversion, and that’s okay.
Single Session Bible Study
JoHannah Reardon
$4.95Add to Cart
Bible Study Basics: The Letters of John
Bible Study Basics: The Letters of John
Live out the message of Jesus.
Multi Session Bible Study
Amy Jackson and Justin Marr
$14.95Add to Cart
The Bond of Friendship
The Bond of Friendship
In our modern day of mobility and instant gratification, what might li ...
Single Session Bible Study
JoHannah Reardon
$4.95Add to Cart
Price:
$24.75
Format:
Microsoft Word
Store Code:
CC08
Add to Cart Add to Cart
Browse by:
Free Newsletters
Christian Bible Studies (Weekly) [Each issue highlights new, ready-to-download Bible studies at ChristianBibleStudies.com, and other tools to help you become a dynamic teacher of God’s Word.]
Small Groups (Weekly) [Regular access to innovative training resources, Bible-based curriculum, and practical articles.]

more newsletters
Follow us
Join the Christian Bible Studies Facebook group.FacebookFollow us on TwitterTwitterSubscribe to the Christian Bible Studies RSS feed.RSS
https://grow.pushpay.com/lp-ebook-2018-8-strategic-hires-that-will-grow-your-church.html?utm_medium=display-paid&utm_source=christianity-today&utm_content=content-ebook&utm_campaign=ebook-strategic-hires&utm_term=faith--all--all--pastors--300x250
Training Tools for Church Board & Elders
Most Popular Studies

    Colossians: Against the Tide
    A Resurrection That Matters
    Psalms: Managing Our Emotions
    James: Living the Christian Life 24/7
    Stewardship: Living a Life that Counts
    The Risen Christ: Jesus' Final Words on Earth

Small Groups

SmallGroups.com offers a diverse set of adaptable training tools for small group models that can be customized to a church's unique needs.
14-Day Free Trial

Get complete access free for 14 days.
Free Trial
Featured Training Tools:
Connect People into Small GroupsConnect People into Small Groups
A la carte price: $39.95
Subscriber price: $0.00
Theological Discussions for EveryoneTheological Discussions for Everyone
A la carte price: $14.95
Subscriber price: $0.00
Christian Bible Studies

    Christian Bible Studies:
    Home
    |
    Help & Info
    |
    Site Map
    |
    FAQ
    |
    Log In

Stay informed. Sign up for our Free newsletter.
Christianity Today

        Give Today
        Who We Are
        What We Do
        Stories
        How to Partner
        Careers
        Media Room
        Follow Us
        Privacy Policy & Cookies
        Terms of Use
        Advertise
        Help
        Contact Us
        My Account

Beautiful Orthodoxy
Christianity Today strengthens the church by richly communicating the breadth of the true, good, and beautiful gospel.
Learn more
© 2019 Christianity Today - a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Back to top
$$$



British Broadcasting CorporationBBC

Accessibility links

    Skip to content
    Skip to local navigation
    Skip to bbc.co.uk navigation
    Skip to bbc.co.uk search
    Accessibility Help

This page has been archived and is no longer updated. Find out more about page archiving.

Religions
The Bible

By John Drane Last updated 2011-07-12

The different books that make up the Christian holy scripture, the Bible.
On this page

    The Bible as library
    The Old Testament
    The New Testament
    Disputes
    The Bible's legacy
    Find out more

The Bible as library
Introduction
Spine of a Bible concordance (an index of the language used in the Bible) Spine of a Holy Bible.

The Bible is not just one book, but an entire library, with stories, songs, poetry, letters and history, as well as literature that might more obviously qualify as 'religious'.

The Christian Bible has two sections, the Old Testament and the New Testament. The Old Testament is the original Hebrew Bible, the sacred scriptures of the Jewish faith, written at different times between about 1200 and 165 BC. The New Testament books were written by Christians in the first century AD.
Top
The Old Testament
The Law

The Hebrew Bible has 39 books, written over a long period of time, and is the literary archive of the ancient nation of Israel. It was traditionally arranged in three sections.

The first five books, Genesis to Deuteronomy. They are not 'law' in a modern Western sense: Genesis is a book of stories, with nothing remotely like rules and regulations, and though the other four do contain community laws they also have many narratives. The Hebrew word for Law ('Torah') means 'guidance' or 'instruction', and that could include stories offering everyday examples of how people were meant to live as well as legal requirements.

These books were later called the 'Pentateuch', and tradition attributed them to Moses. Some parts undoubtedly date from that period, but as things changed old laws were updated and new ones produced, and this was the work of later editors over several centuries.
The Prophets

The Prophets is the largest section of the Hebrew Bible, and has two parts ('former prophets' and 'latter prophets').

The books of 'latter prophets' preserve sayings and stories of religious and political activists ('prophets') who served as the spiritual conscience of the nation throughout its history, reminding people of the social values that would reflect the character of God. Some books are substantial (Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel), others are much shorter (Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi). Sometimes, the prophets could be mime artists and dramatists, accompanying their actions by short spoken messages, often delivered in poetic form. These were the sound bites of their day, which made it easy for others to remember them and then write them down.

The 'former prophets' consist of Joshua, Judges, 1-2 Samuel, 1-2 Kings. They are history books, but what makes them also 'prophets' is that they not only record information, they interpret it, explaining its significance in relation to other events in the history of Israel, and of the wider world of their day.
The Writings

These include Psalms (songs, prayers and liturgies for worship), Proverbs (sayings of homespun wisdom), Job (a drama that explores the nature of suffering), plus the 'five scrolls' ('Megiloth') which were grouped together because each had associations with a particular religious festival: Ruth (the Jewish Feast of Weeks, also called Shavuot), Song of Solomon (Passover), Ecclesiastes (Tabernacles), Lamentations (Destruction of Jerusalem), and Esther (Purim). This section also includes the last books of the Hebrew Bible to be written: Ezra, Nehemiah, and 1-2 Chronicles (all history books), and Daniel (visions of a better world).
Top
The New Testament

The New Testament has 27 books, written between about 50 and 100 AD, and falling naturally into two sections: the Gospels, which tell the story of Jesus (Matthew, Mark, Luke and John); and the Letters (or epistles) - written by various Christian leaders to provide guidance for the earliest church communities.
The Letters

Letters were the natural way for itinerant church leaders to communicate with their converts, and the earliest ones were written before the Gospels. With some exceptions (Romans, Hebrews), they were not meant to be formal presentations of Christian belief, but offered advice to people who were working out how to express their commitment to Jesus in ways that would be relevant to the many different cultural contexts in which they found themselves throughout the Roman empire.

Reading them can be like listening to one half of a conversation, as the writers give answers to questions sent to them either verbally or in writing. Paul was the most prolific writer of such letters, though he was not the only one.
The Gospels

The Gospels were written to present the life and teachings of Jesus in ways that would be appropriate to different readerships, and for that reason are not all the same. They were not intended to be biographies of Jesus, but selective accounts that would demonstrate his significance for different cultures.

The first three are effectively different editions of the same materials, and for that reason are known as the 'synoptic gospels'. The writer of Luke also wrote the Acts of the Apostles, which tells the story of how Christianity spread from being a small group of Jewish believers in the time of Jesus to becoming a worldwide faith in less than a generation.

The New Testament concludes with the book of Revelation, which begins with a series of letters to seven churches in the area of Asia Minor (modern Turkey), but then offers a visionary presentation of the meaning of all things, from creation to the end of the world.
Top
Disputes and controversies
Historical accuracy of Biblical accounts

Some Biblical scholars, armed with archaeological evidence, dispute the historical accuracy of some of the books from the Old Testament. In her 2011 TV series Bible's Buried Secrets, Dr Francesca Stavrakopoulou questioned whether King David's kingdom, as described in Samuel, did in fact ever exist.
Top
The Bible's legacy
Legacy and impact of the Bible

The sheer diversity of literature in the Bible is one of the secrets of its continuing popularity through the centuries. There is something for all moods and many different cultures. Its message is not buried in religious jargon only accessible to either believers or scholars, but reflects the issues that people struggle with in daily life. Despite their different emphases, all its authors shared the conviction that this world and its affairs are not just a haphazard sequence of random coincidences, but are the forum of God's activity - a God who (unlike the God of the philosophers) is not remote or unknowable, but a personal being who can be known by ordinary people.

Melvyn Bragg believes the King James version of the Bible, first published in 1611, has had a profound effect on human history over the last 400 years.
Top
Find out more

    Hebrew Bible
    Book of Revelation
    Didache - the first Christian document
    The Bible in ten seconds

Top
«
More Christianity
See also

    Religion and Ethics home
    Interfaith calendar
    Ethics guides

Around the BBC

    BBC Religion - Torah
    BBC Religion - Book of Revelation
    BBC Religion - Didache, the first Christian document
    BBC Religion - The Bible in ten seconds
    Radio 4 - History of the King James Bible
    Heart & Soul - Bible translations today
    Heart & Soul - The sanctity of Biblical language
    BBC News - How the King James Bible changed the way we speak

Elsewhere on the web

    BibleGateway.com

BBC iD
Sign in

Search term:
BBC navigation

    News
    Sport
    Weather
    iPlayer
    TV
    Radio
    More…

BBC links

        Mobile site Terms of Use About the BBC 
        Privacy Accessibility Help 
        Cookies Contact the BBC 
        Parental Guidance 

BBC

BBC © 2014 The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read more.
$$$

